LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS.


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA.


The  Temple,


3ft0  s^inigtrp  anti  ^ertiices.


AS  THEY  WERE


AT  THE    TIME  OF  ^ESUS  CHRIST.
Rev.  Dr.  'feDERSHEIM,

AUTHOJi    OF
"  SKETCHES  OF  JEWISH  SOCIAL  LIFE  AT  THE  TIME  OF  CHRIST,"    **  THE  BIBLE    HISTORY.

ETC


N^vum  Testamentum  in  Vetere  latet;    Vetus  in  Novo  pateU


\
NEW    EDITION  — REVISED,  >J-        '^


BOSTON:
IRA    BRADLEY    AND     CO.


Copyright,  1881,

BT

Ira  Bradley  &  Co.


PREFACE.


It  has  been  my  wish  in  this  book,  to  take  the  reader
back  eighteen  centuries  ;  to  show  him  Jerusalem  as  it  was,
when  our  Lord  passed  through  its  streets,  and  the  Sanctuary,
when  He  taught  in  its  porches  and  courts  ;  to  portray,  not
only  the  appearance  and  structure  of  the  Temple,  but  to
describe  its  ordinances  and  worshippers,  the  ministry  of  its
priesthood,  and  the  ritual  of  its  services.  In  so  doing,
I  have  hoped,  not  only  to  illustrate  a  subject,  in  itself
most  interesting  to  the  Bible-student,  but  also,  and  chiefly,
to  sketch,  in  one  important  aspect,  the  religious  life  of
the  period  in  which  our  blessed  Lord  lived  upon  earth,
the  circumstances  under  which  He  taught,  and  the  reli-
gious rites  by  which  He  was  surrounded ;  and  whose
meaning,  in  their  truest  sense.  He  came  to  fulfil.  For,  the
Temple  and  its  services  form,  so  to  speak,  part  of  the  life  and
work  of  Jesus  Christ ;  part  also  of  His  teaching,  and  of  that  of
His  apostles.  What  connects  itself  so  closely  with  Him  must
be  of  deepest  interest.  We  want  to  be  able,  as  it  were,  to
enter  Jerusalem  in  His  train,  along  with  those  who  on  that
Palm-Sunday  cried,  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  ; "  to  see
its  streets  and  buildings ;  to  know  exactly  how  the  Temple


vi  Preface.

looked,  and  to  find  our  way  through  its  gates,  among  its
porches,  courts,  and  chambers  ;  to  be  present  in  spirit  at  its
services  ;  to  witness  the  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice ;
to  mingle  with  the  crowd  of  worshippers  at  the  great  Festivals,
and  to  stand  by  the  side  of  those  who  offered  sacrifice  or  free-
will offering,  or  who  awaited  the  solemn  purification  which
would  restore  them  to  the  fellowship  of  the  Sanctuary.  We
want  to  j-^^  these  rites,  as  it  were,  before  us — to  hear  the  Temple-
music,  to  know  the  very  Psalms  that  were  chanted,  the  prayers
that  were  offered,  the  duties  of  the  priesthood,  the  sacrificial
worship  in  which  they  engaged,  and  the  very  attitude  of  the
worshippers — in  short,  all  those  details  which  in  their  combina-
tion enable  us  vividly  to  realise  the  scenes,  as  if  we  ourselves
were  present  in  them.  For,  amidst  them  all,  we  ever  see  that
one  great  outstanding  Personality,  Whose  presence  filled  that
houje  with  glory.  Indeed,  the  New  Testament  transports  us
intw  almost  every  one  of  the  scenes  described  in  this  book.  It
also  makes  frequent  reference  to  them  for  illustration.  We  see
the  father  of  John  ministering  in  his  course  in  the  burning  of
incense  ;  the  Virgin-Mother  at  her  purification,  presenting  her
First-born  ;  the  child  Jesus  among  the  Rabbis  ;  the  Master
teaching  in  the  porches  of  the  Temple,  sitting  in  the  Treasury,
attending  the  various  festivals,  giving  His  sanction  to  the
purifications  by  directing  the  healed  leper  to  the  priest,  and,
above  all,  as  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  applying  to  Himself
the  significant  rites  of  the  Sanctuary.  And,  as  we  follow  on,
we  witness  the  birth  of  the  Church  on  the  day  of  Pentecost ;
we  mark  the  frequent  illustrations  of  spiritual  realities  by
Temple-scenes,  in  the  writings  of  the  apostles,  but  more
especially  in  the  Book  of  Revelation,  whose  imagery  is  so
often  taken  from  them ;  and  we  still  look  for  the  accomplish-


Preface.  vii

ment  of  the  one  yet  unfulfilled  type — the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,
as  the  grand  harvest-festival  of  the  Church.

I  have  thus  placed  the  permanent  Christian  interest  in  the
foreground,  because  it  occupied  that  place  in  my  own  mind.
At  the  same  time,  from  the  nature,  of  the  subject,  I  hope  th^
volume  may  fulfil  yet  another  and  kindred  purpose.  Although'
it  does  not  profess  to  be  a  Handbook  of  Biblical  Antiqui-
ties, nor  a  treatise  on  the  types  of  the  Old  Testament,  both
these  subjects  had  to  be  constantly  referred  to.  But  to  realise*
thegorgeous  Temple  ritual,  in  all  its  details,  possesses  morn
than  a  merely  historical  interest.  We  are  indeed  fascinated  b>
It  ;  we  live  over  again,  if  not  the  period  of  Israel's  tempora\
glory,  yet  that  of  deepest  interest  to  us  ;  and  we  can  vividly
represent  to  ourselves  what  the  Temple  had  been  before  its
services  had  for  ever  passed  away.  But  beyond  this,  stretch-
ing far  back  through  the  period  of  prophets  and  kings,^  and
reaching  up  to  the  original  revelation  of  Jehovah  amid  vthe
awful  grandeur  of  Sinai,  our  holiest  recollections,  and  the  very
springs  of  our  religious  life  rise  among  these  ordinances  and
types,  which  we  here  see  fully  developed  and  carried  out,  and
that  under  the  very  light  of  His  Presence,  to  Whom  they  all
had  pointed.  I  say  not,  whether  or  how  far  later  Jewish  prac-
tice may  have  misapprehended  the  original  import  or  the
meaning  of  the  Divine  ordinances.  That  was  beyond  my
present  task.  But  an  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  sacri-
ficial services  at  the  time  of  Christ  must  not  only  tend  to
correct  mistakes,  but  throw  a  fresh  and  vivid  light  upon  all,  and
influence  our  views  of  what  the  Levitical  ordinances  were
intended  to  be  and  to  teach.

To  have  thus  stated  my  object  in  this  book,  is  also  to  have
indicated  its  difficulties.     Yet  abundant  materials  for  such  a


viii  Preface.

work,  though  scattered  far  and  wide,  are  within  our  reach.  Not
to  speak  of  contemporary  writings,  as  those  of  Josephus  and
Philo,  and  references  in  the  New  Testament  itself,  we  have  in
the  Mishnah  a  body  of  authoritative  traditions,  reaching  up,
not  only  to  Temple-times,  but  even  to  the  days  of  Jesus  Christ.^
On  this  source  of  information,  of  course  in  conjunction  with
the  Old  Testament  itself,  I  have  been  chiefly  dependent.

While  thus  deriving  my  materials  at  first  hand,  I  have  also
thankfully  made  use  of  any  and  every  help  within  my  reach.
Foremost  I  place  here  the  writings  of  Maimonides,  not  only
because  he  is  of  greatest  authority  among  the  Jews,  but
because  his  vast  and  accurate  knowledge  of  these  subjects,
and  the  clearness  and  subtlety  of  his  intellect  entitle  him
to  that  position.  Next  to  him  come  the  numerous  writers
on  Biblical  Antiquities,  in  Latin  and  German ;  works  on
Typology — scientific  and  popular ;  treatises  on  the  Life  and
Times   of  our    Lord  ;^  histories   of  the   Jewish  Nation,   or

1  Quite  a  different  estimate  must  be  formed  of  the  Gemara  (which  in  a  general
way  may  be  described  as  a  twofold  commentary — the  Jerusalem  and  Babylonian
Ge77iara — upon  the  Mishnah),  not  only  from  its  much  later  date,  but  also  from  the
strange  and  heterogeneous  congeries  which  are  found  in  the  many  folios  of  the
Talmud.  Judaism  was,  at  the  time  of  its  compilation,  already  thoroughly  ossified  •
and  the  trustworthiness  of  tradition  greatly  impaired  not  merely  by  the  long  in-
terval of  time  that  had  elapsed,  but  by  dogmatic  predilections  and  prejudices,  and
by  the  not  unnatural  wish  to  foist  comparatively  recent  views,  practices,  and
prayers  upon  Temple-times.  Indeed,  the  work  wants  in  its  greatest  part  even  the
local  colouring  of  the  Mishnah — an  element  of  such  importance  in  Eastern  tradi-
tions, where,  so  to  speak,  the  colours  are  so  fast,  that,  for  example,  to  this  day
the  modern  Arab  designations  of  places  and  localities  have  preserved  the  original
Palestinian  names,  and  not  those  more  recent  Greek  or  Roman  with  which
successive  conquerors  had  overlaid  them.

^  The  comprehensive  and  eloquent  volumes  of  Dr.  Farrar  on  The  Life  of  Christ
have  only  reached  me  as  the  last  chapters  of  this  book  were  passing  through  the
press,  and  I  could  only  refer  in  the  Appendix  to  one  question  raised  by  him.  But
Uve  reader  will  readily  perceive  the  various  differences  between  my  account  of  Jewish


Preface.  ix

of  Judaism  ;  commentaries  on  such  passages  in  the  Old  and
New  Testament  as  bore  on  these  subjects  ;  and  numerous
treatises  on  cognate  points.  In  my  study  of  ancient  Jerusalem,
I  had  the  benefit  of  the  labours  of  recent  explorers,  from
Robinson  and  Barclay  to  the  volumes  published  under  the
auspices  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund — an  undertaking
which  deserves  far  wider  support  than  it  has  yet  obtained.  To
the  Cyclopaedias  (Biblical  and  other)  of  Winer,  Herzog,  Ersch
and  Gruber,  Dr.  Smith,  and  Kitto  (the  third  edition),  I  have
been  greatly  indebted.  The  last-named  of  these  works  has
the  special  merit  of  a  series  of  articles  on  Jewish  subjects  (as  I
may  designate  them),  written  in  quite  an  original  manner,  and
with  most  competent  knowledge.  Although,  as  will  appear
from  the  text,  I  have  been  obliged  frequently  to  differ
from  their  writer,  yet  these  articles  must,  from  the  fulness  and
ability  of  their  treatment,  be  of  very  great  use  to  the  student.
Lightfoot's  Hor(2  Hebraicce  et  Talmudicce  are  known  to  every
scholar.  Not  so,  perhaps,  his  small  learned  treatise  De  minis-
terio  templi.  The  title  and  many  of  the  subjects  are  similar  to
those  treated  in  the  present  volume.  But  the  learned  reader
will  at  once  perceive  that  the  plan  and  execution  are  quite
different,  though  the  work  has  been  of  great  service  to  me.
Perhaps  I  ought  not  here  to  omit  such  names  as  Relandus,
Buxtorf,  Otho,  Schottgen,  Meuschen,  Goodwin,  Hottinger,
Wagenseil,  and  Lundius  ;  and,  among  modern  writers,  Bahr,


observances  and  that  of  Dr.  Farrar.  On  one  point,  however,  I  must  here  be
allowed  respectfully  to  express  my  sincere  regret.  The  state  of  the  Jewish  nation
at  the  time  of  Christ — its  spiritual  life  crushed  out  under  the  weight  of  Pharisa-
ism, work-righteousness,  and  service  of  the  letter— was  sufficiently  sad  without
bringing  against  the  whole  people  such  sweeping  charges  as  those  of  universal
greed,  avarice,  and  utter  demoralisation,  which,  I  am  thankful,  are  not  supported
by  historical  evidence.


X  Preface.

Keil,  Kurtz,  de  Wette,  Saalschlitz,  Zunz,  Jost,  Geiger,  Herzfeld,
and  Gratz,  of  whose  works  I  have,  I  may  say,  constantly  availed
myself.  Many  others  have  been  consulted,  some  of  which  are
quoted  in  the  foot-notes,  while  others  are  not  expressly  re-
ferred to,  as  not  adding  anything  material  to  our  knowledge.
In  general,  I  should  explain,  that  I  have  acted  on  the  principle
of  giving  the  minimum  of  references  possible.  It  would  have
been  easy  to  have  multiplied  them  almost  indefinitely.  But  I
wished  to  avoid  cumbering  my  pages  with  an  array  of  autho-
rities, which  too  often  give  a  mere  appearance  of  learning ;
and,  while  they  are  not  needed  by  scholars,  may  tend  to
interfere  with  the  more  general  and  popular  use  of  such  a
work.  For  a  similar  reason,  I  have  throughout  avoided  the
use  of  Hebrew  and  even  Greek  letter-press.  To  print  an
expression  in  Hebrew  letters  could  not  be  necessary  for
students,  while  the  general  reader,  whom  it  too  often  bewilders
by  a  show  of  knowledge,  must  in  such  case  necessarily  pass
it  over,  unnoticed  and  unknown.

But,  however  earnest  my  endeavours,  I  cannot  but  feel  that
this  book  must  in  many  respects  come  short  of  the  objects
I  had  in  view.  Amid  such  variety  of  details,  each  requiring
careful  investigation  and  study,  often  seemingly  quite  dispro-
portionate to  the  results  obtained,  I  cannot  hope  to  have  been
always  accurate.  Besides,  I  am  sure  that  further  inquiry  will
still  add  to  the  amount  of  information  already  possessed.  This
only  would  I  ask  the  reader  to  believe,  that  while  this  book
embodies  the  studies  of  many  years,  I  have  during  its  actual
composition  deemed  no  labour  nor  pains  irksome  in  comparing
the  results  of  my  own  investigations  with  those  of  all,  within
reach,  who  were  entitled  to  such  consideration.  Thus  much  for
the  matter  of  the  book.     As  to  its  form,  some  subjects  may  be


Preface.  xi

touched  in  it  which  do  not  equally  interest  all  readers  ;  ^  others
may  appear  to  have  been  treated  with  too  little  or  else  with
too  much  detail ;  objections  may  be  raised  to  interpretations
of  types,  or  even  to  the  general  view  of  the  Old  Testament
which  has  been  taken  throughout.  My  aim  has  been  to  make
the  book  as  complete  and  generally  useful  as  I  could,  and
clearly  to  express  my  convictions  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  Old
Testament.  But  on  one  point  especially  I  would  wish  to  be
quite  explicit.  At  the  close  of  these  studies,  I  would  say,  with
humble  and  heartfelt  thankfulness,  that  step  by  step  my
Christian  faith  has  only  been  strengthened  by  them,  that,  as
I  proceeded,  the  conviction  has  always  been  deepened  that
Christ  is  indeed  "the  end  of  the  Law  for  righteousness,"  to
Whom  all  the  ordinances  of  the  Old  Testament  had  pointed,
and  in  Whom  alone,  alike  the  people  and  the  history  of  Israel
find  their  meaning.  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  Temple-services
are  not  so  many  strange  or  isolated  rites,  for  the  origin  of
which  we  must  look  among  neighbouring  nations,  or  in  the
tendencies  natural  to  men  during  the  infancy  of  their  history.
Rather,  all  now  becomes  one  connected  whole — the  design
and  execution  bearing  even  stronger  evidence  to  its  Divine
authorship  than  other  of  God's  works, — where  every  part  fits
into  the  other,  and  each  and  all  point  with  unswerving  stead-
fastness to  Him  in  Whom  the  love  of  God  was  fully  mani-
fested, and  its  purposes  towards  the  world  entirely  carried  out.
From  first  to  last,  the  two  dispensations  are  substantially  one  ;
Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel,  is  also  the  God  and  Father  of  our

1  Thus  Chaps,  i.  and  ii.,  which  give  a  description  of  ancient  Jerusalem  and  of
the  structure  and  arrangements  of  the  Temple,  may  not  interest  some  readers,  yet
'it  could  neither  be  left  out,  nor  put  in  a  different  part  of  the  book.  Those  for
wnom  this  subject  has  no  attractions  may,  therefore,  begin  with  Chap.  iii.


xii  Preface.

Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ — Novum  Testamentum  in  Vetera
latet ;    Vetus  in  Novo  patet.

In  now  sending  among  readers  whom  I  know  not,  perhaps
among  critics  disposed  to  watch  and  try  with  not  friendly
eyes,  what  for  these  years  has  been  really  a  labour  of  love  to
me,  the  constant  subject  of  my  studies,  and  the  companion  of
my  thoughts,  I  feel  loath,  and  almost  fearful  at  the  parting.
But,  in  all  humility,  I  would  desire  to  commend  its  progress
to  the  care  of  the  Master,  believing  that  He  will  forgive  its
imperfections,  and  all  wherein  I  have  erred  or  been  mistaken,
and  trusting  that,  however  unworthy  my  service  may  be,  He
may  in  some  measure  make  use  of  it,  who  needs  not  our  best
service,  and  yet  condescends  to  employ  even  the  humblest.

A.  E,       '


Heniach,  Bournemouth,
\st  August^  1874.


CONTENTS


CHAP.  tAGE

I.  A  First  View  of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  Temple  •       •       •      i

II.  Within  the  Holy  Place     ••••••••    19

iiL  Temple  Order,  Revenues,  and  Music      •        •       •        •        •    33

IV.  The  Officiating  Priesthood      ••«••••    58

V,  Sacrifices:  Their  Order  and  Their  Mea^jing       «        .        •    79
VI.  The  Burnt-Offering,  the  Sin-  and  Trespass- Offering,  and

THE  PeACE-OFFERING    ........      96

viL  At  Night  in  the  Temple   .       •       •       .       •       .       .        .112

VIII.  The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice      •        .        •        .  124

IX.     Sabbath  in  the  Temple 145

X.  Festive  Cycles  and  Arrangement  of  the  Calendar    .        .165

XL  The  Passover        ••••••••••  177

XII.  The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  Lord's  Supper   •        ,       .        ,196

Kill.  The    Feast    of    Unleavened    Bread    and     the    Day    of

Pentecost    •••••.••••  215


xiv  Contents.

CHAP.  PAGB

XIV.    The  Feast  of  Tabernacles       ...•,,,  232

XV.    The  New  Moons  :  the  Feast  of  the  Seventh  New  Moon,

OR  OF  Trumpets,  or  New  Year's  Day     .       *.        ,        .  250

XVI.    The  Day  of  Atonement    ..•.•..,  263

XVII.     Post-Mosaic  Festivals       ...•••..  289

XVIII.  On  Purifications. — The  Burning  of  the  Red  Heifer —
The  Cleansing  of  the  Healed  Leper— The  Trial  of
the  Woman  suspected  of  Adultery      ....  301

XIX.     On  Vows. — The  Nazarite's  Vow — The  Offering  of  First-
fruits  IN  THE  Temple        .  •      .        .        .        .        .        .  322

Appendix. — Did    the    Lord    institute    His    **  Supper"    on    the

Paschal  Night? ,  341

Analysis  of  Contents 352

Index        ••^•••••««««.  361

Index  to  Scripture  References  ••••••••  365


JERUSALEM  AT  THE  TIME   OF  KING   HEROD.
Sketch  showing  approximately  the  lie  of  rock.


Foant'?


Scale  5T5,fe.
j  Herod's  Temple.


1.  Temple  of  Solomon

2.  Palace  of  Solomon

3.  Added  on  by  Herod

4.  Exhedra  (The  Tower,  Baris  or  Antonia).

5.  Antonia  (The  Castle).

6.  Cloisters  joining  Antonia  to  Temple

7.  Xystus.        8.  Agrippa's  Palace.


9.  Zion  and  Acra.
10    Lower  Pool  of  Gihon  or  Amygdalon.

11.  Herod's  Palace.

12.  Bethesda  or  Struthlon.

13.  Bridge  built  by  Herod.

14.  The  Lower  City  called  sometimes  Akra.

15.  British  Cemetery,  a.d.  1870.


\,By  permission  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund*


THE    TEMPLE,

Its     Ministi\y    and     Sei\yices.
CHAPTER    I.

A  FIRST  VIEW  OF  JERUSALEM,  AND  OF  THE  TEMPLE.

"And  when  He  was   come  near,   He  beheld  the  city,  and  wept    over  it"

Luke  xix.  41.

IN  every  age,  the  memory  of  Jerusalem  has  stirred  the
deepest  feelings.  Jews,  Christians,  and  Mohammedans
turn  to  it  with  reverent  affection.  It  almost  seems  as
if  in  some  sense  each  could  call  it  his  ^'  happy  home,"
the  "  name  ever  dear "  to  him.  For  our  holiest  thoughts
of  the  past,  and  our  happiest  hopes  for  the  future,  connect
themselves  with  '*  the  city  of  our  God.''  We  know  from
many  passages  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  especially  from
the  Book  of  Psalms,  with  what  ardent  longing  the  exiles
from  Palestine  looked  towards  it ;  and  during  the  long  cen-
turies of  dispersion  and  cruel  persecution,  up  to  this  day,
the  same  aspirations  have  breathed  in  almost  every  service
of  the  synagogue,  and  in  none  more  earnestly  than  in'  that
of  the  paschal  night,  which  to  us  is  for  ever  associated  with
the  death  of   our   Saviour.      It  is  this  one  grand  presence

B


2  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

there  of  "  the  Desire  of  all  nations,"  which  has  for  ever
cast  a  hallowed  light  round  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple,  and
given  fulfilment  to  the  prophecy — "Many  people  shall  go
and  say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of
Jehovah,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob ;  and  He  will
teach  us  of  His  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  His  paths  :  for
out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the  word  of  Jehovah
from  Jerusalem."^  His  feet  have  trodden  the  busy  streets
of  Jerusalem,  and  the  shady  recesses  of  the  Mount  of  Olives  ;
His  figure  has  "  filled  with  glory  "  the  Temple  and  its  ser-
vices ;  His  person  has  given  meaning  to  the  land  and  the
people  ;  and  the  decease  which  He  accomplished  at  Jeru-
salem has  been  for  the  life  of  all  nations.  These  facts  can
never  be  past — they  are  eternally  present ;  not  only  to
our  faith,  but  also  to  our  hope  ;  for  He  '*  shall  so  come  in
like  manner  "  as  the  "  men  of  Galilee  "  had  on  Mount  Ohvet
^^  ^^^xi  Him  go  into  heaven.'*

But  our  memories  of  Jerusalem  stretch  far  back  beyond
these  scenes.  In  the  distance  of  a  remote  antiquity  we  read  of
Melchisedek,  the  typical  priest-king  of  Salem,  who  went  out  to
meet  Abraham,  the  ancestor  of  the  Hebrew  race,  and  blessed
him.  A  little  later,  and  this  same  Abraham  was  coming  up
from  Hebron  on  his  mournful  journey,  to  offer  up  his  only
son.  A  few  miles  south  of  the  city,  the  road  by  which  he
travelled  climbs  the  top  of  a  high  promontory,  that  juts
into  the  deep  Kedron  valley.  From  this  spot,  through  the
cleft  of  the  mountains  which  the  Kedron  has  made  for  its
course,  one  object  rose  up  straight  before  him.  It  was
Moriah,  the  mount  on  which  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac  was  to  be
offered.^     Here  Solomon  afterwards  built  the  Temple.     For

*  Isaiah  ii.  3.  *  Barclay,  City  of  the  Great  King,  p.  58,


Jerusalem  and  the  Temple.  3

over  Mount  Moriah  David  had  seen  the  hand  of  the  destroy-
ing angel  stayed,  probably  just  above  where  afterwards  from
the  large  altar  of  burnt  offering  the  smoke  of  countless
sacrifices  rose  day  by  day.  On  the  opposite  hill  of  Zion,
separated  only  by  a  ravine  from  Moriah,  stood  the  city  and
the  palace  of  David,  and  close  by  the  site  of  the  Temple
the  tower  of  David.  After  that  period  an  ever-shifting
historical  panorama  passes  before  our  view,  unchanged  only
in  this,  that,  amidst  all  the  varying  events,  Jerusalem  remains
the  one  centre  of  interest  and  attraction,  till  we  come  to
that  Presence  which  has  made  it,  even  in  its  desolateness,
"  Hephzibah,"  "  sought  out,"  "  a  city  not  forsaken."^

The  Rabbis  have  a  curious  conceit  about  the  origin  of  the
name  Jerusalem,  which  is  commonly  taken  to  mean,  *^  the
foundation,"  "  the  abode,"  or  "  the  inheritance  of  peace."
They  make  it  a  compound  of  Jireh  and  Shalem^  and  say
that  Abraham  called  it  "  Jehovah-Jireh,"  while  Shem  had
named  it  Shalem^  but  that  God  combined  the  two  into
Jireh-Shalem,  Jerushalaim,  or  Jerusalem.*  There  was  cer-
tainly something  peculiar  in  the  choice  of  Palestine  to
be  the  country  of  the  chosen  people,  as  well  as  of  Jerusalem
to  be  its  capital.  The  political  importance  of  the  land  must
be  judged  from  its  situation  rather  than  its  size.  Lying
midway  between  the  east  and  the  west,  and  placed  between
the  great  military  monarchies,  first  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,
and  then  of  Rome  and  the  East,  it  naturally  became  the
battle-field  of  the  nations  and  the  highway  of  the  world.
As  for  Jerusalem,  its  situation  was  entirely  unique.  Pitched
on  a  height  of  about  2,610  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,
its  climate  was  more  healthy,  equable,  and  temperate  than

^  Isaiah  Ixii.  4.  ^  Ber,  R,


4  The   Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

that  of  any  other  part  of  the  country.  From  the  top  of
Mount  Olivet  an  unrivalled  view  of  the  most  interesting
localities  in  the  land  might  be  obtained.  To  the  east  the
eye  would  wander  over  the  intervening  plains  to  Jericho,
mark  the  tortuous  windings  of  Jordan,  and  the  sullen  grey
of  the  Dead  Sea,  finally  resting  on  Pisgah  and  the  mountains
of  Moab  and  Ammon,  To  the  south,  you  might  see
beyond  "  the  king's  gardens,"  as  far  as  the  grey  tops  of
"  the  hill-country  of  Judaea/'  Westwards,  the  view  would
be  arrested  by  the  mountains,  of  Bether}  whilst  the  haze  in
the  distant  horizon  marked  the  line  of  the  Great  Sea.  To  the
north,  such  well-known  localities  met  the  eye  as  Mizpeh,
Gibeon,  Ajalon,  Michmash,  Ramah,  and  Anathoth.  But,
above  all,  just  at  your  feet,  the  Holy  City  would  lie  in  all
her  magnificence,  like  "  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband."

**  Beautiful  for   situation,    the  joy  of  the   whole   earth,    is
Mount  Zion,  on  the  sides  of  the  north,  the  city  of  the  Great

King Walk  about  Zion,  and  go  round  about  her :

tell  the  towers  thereof  Mark  ye  well  her  bulwarks,  consider
her  palaces."  If  this  could  be  said  of  Jerusalem  even  in
the  humbler  days  of  her  native  monarchy,^  it  was  emphati-
cally true  at  the  time  when  Jesus  "  beheld  the  city,"  after
Herod  the  Great  had  adorned  it  with  his  wonted  splendour.
As  the  pilgrim  bands  "came  up"  from  all  parts  of  the
country  to  the  great  feasts,  they  must  have  stood  enthralled
when  its  beauty  first  burst  upon  their  gaze.^  Not  merely
remembrances  of  the  past,  or  the  sacred    associations  con-

1  Song  of  Solomon  ii.  17.

^  Psalm  xlviii.  2,  12,  13.     The  psalm  was  probably  written  during  the  reign  of
Jehoshaphat.

2  See  the  **  Songs  of  Degrees,"  or  rather  **  Psalms  of  Ascent"  (to  the  feasts),
Bpecially  Psalm  cxxii.


Jerusalem  and  the  Temple.  5

nected  with  the  present,  but  the  grandeur  of  the  scene
before  them  must  have  kindled  their  admiration  into
•  enthusiasm.  For  Jerusalem  was  a  city  of  palaces,  and
right  royally  enthroned  as  none  other.  Placed  on  an
eminence  higher  than  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  it  was
cut  off  and  isolated  by  deep  valleys  on  all  sides  but  one,
giving  it  the  appearance  of  an  immense  natural  fortress.
All  round  it,  on  three  sides,  like  a  natural  fosse,  ran  the
deep  ravines  of  the  Valley  of  Hinnom  and  of  the  Black
Valley,  or  Kedron,  which  merged  to  the  south  of  the  city,
descending  in  such  steep  declivity  that  where  the  two  meet
is  670  feet  below  the  point  whence  each  had  started/  Only
on  the  north-west  was  the  city,  as  it  were,  bound  to  the  main-
land. And  as  if  to  give  it  yet  more  the  character  of  a  series
of  fortress-islands,  a  deep  natural  cleft — the  Tyropceon — ran
south  and  north  right  through  the  middle  of  the  city,  then
turned  sharply  westwards,  separating  Mount  Zion  from  Mount
Acra.  Similarly,  Acra  was  divided  from  Mount  Moriah,  and
the  latter  again  by  an  artificial  valley  from  Bezetha,  or  the
New  Town.  Sheer  up  from  these  encircling  ravines  rose  the
city  of  marble  and  cedar-covered  palaces.  Up  that  middle
cleft,  down  in  the  valley,  and  along  the  slopes  of  the  hills,  crept
the  busy  town,  with  its  streets,  markets,  and  bazaars.  But
alone,  and  isolated  in  its  grandeur,  stood  the  Temple  Mount.
Terrace  upon  terrace  its  courts  rose,  till,  high  above  the  city,
within  the  enclosure  of  marble  cloisters,  cedar-roofed  and
richly  ornamented,  the  Temple  itself  stood  out  a  mass  of
snowy  marble  and  of  gold,  glittering  in  the  sunlight  against

^  In  fact,  the  valley  of  Hinnom  and  the  glen  of  Kedion  were  really  one.  For
this  and  other  topographical  details  the  reader  is  referred  to  The  Recovery  of
Jerusalem^  by  Capts.  Wilson  and  Warren,  R.E,


6  The  Temple,  its  Mmistry  and  Services.

the  half-encircling  green  background  of  Olivet.  In  all  his
wanderings  the  Jew  had  not  seen  a  city  like  his  own
Jerusalem.  Not  Antioch  in  Asia,  not  even  imperial  Rome
herself,  excelled  it  in  architectural  splendour.  Nor  has  there
been,  either  in  ancient  or  modern  times,  a  sacred  building
equal  to  the  Temple,  whether  for  situation  or  magnificence ;
nor  yet  have  there  been  festive  throngs  like  those  joyous
hundreds  of  thousands  who,  with  their  hymns  of  praise,
crowded  towards  the  city  on  the  eve  of  a  Passover.  No
wonder  that  the  song  burst  from  the  lips  of  those  pilgrims :

**  Still  stand  our  feet

Within  thy  gates,  Jerusalem  !
Jerusalem,  ah  !  thou  art  built
As  a  city  joined  companion-like  together.***

From  whatever  side  the  pilgrim  might  approach  the  city,
the  first  impression  must  have  been  solemn  and  deep.  But
a  special  surprise  awaited  those  who  came,  whether  from
Jericho  or  from  Galilee,  by  the  well-known  road  that  led
over  the  Mount  of  Olives.  From  the  south,  beyond  royal
Bethlehem — from  the  w^est,  descending  over  the  heights  of
Beth-horon — or  from  the  north,  journeying  along  the  moun-
tains of  Ephraim,  they  would  have  seen  the  city  first  vaguely
looming  in  the  grey  distance,  till,  gradually  approaching,  they
had  become  familiar  with  its  outlines.  It  was  far  otherwise
from  the  east  A  turn  in  the  road,  and  the  city,  hitherto
entirely  hid  from  view,  would  burst  upon  them  suddenly,
closely,  and  to  most  marked  advantage.  It  was  by  this
road  Jesus  made  His  triumphal  entry  from  Bethany  on  the

^  Psalm  cxxii.  2,  3.  The  allusion  is  to  the  various  hills  which, '  *  like  companions,"
are  joined  together  to  form  **  the  city,"


jferusalem  and  the  Temple.  7

week  of  His  Passion.^  Up  from  "the  house  of  dates"  the
broad,  rough  road  wound  round  the  shoulder  of  Olivet
Thither  the  wondering  crowd  from  Bethany  followed  Him,
and  there  the  praising  multitude  from  the  city  met  Him.
They  had  come  up  that  same  Olivet,  so  familiar  to  them  all.
For  did  it  not  seem  almost  to  form  part  of  the  city  itself,
shutting  it  off  like  a  screen  from  the  desert  land  that
descended  beyond  to  Jordan  and  the  Dead  Sea  ?

From  the  Temple  Mount  to  the  western  base  of  Olivet,  it
was  not  more  than  lOO  or  200  yards  straight  across,  though,
of  course,  the  distance  to  the  summit  was  much  greater,  say
about  half  a  mile.  By  the  nearest  pathway  it  was  only  918
yards  from  the  city  gate  to  the  principal  summit.^  Olivet
was  always  fresh  and  green,  even  in  earliest  spring  or  during
parched  summer — the  coolest,  the  pleasantest,  the  most
sheltered  w^alk  about  Jerusalem.  For  across  this  road  the
Temple  and  its  mountain  flung  their  broad  shadows,  and
luxuriant  foliage  spread  a  leafy  canopy  overhead.  They
w^ere  not  gardens,  in  the  ordinary  Western  sense,  through
which  one  passed,  far  less  orchards  ;  but  something  peculiar
to  those  climes,  where  Nature  everywhere  strews  with  lavish
hand  her  flowers,  and  makes  her  gardens — where  the  garden
bursts  into  the  orchard,  and  the  orchard  stretches  into  the
field,  till,  high  up,  olive  and  fig  mingle  with  the  darker
cypress  and  pine.  The  stony  road  up  Olivet  wound  along
terraces  covered  with  olives,  whose  silver  and  dark  green
leaves   rustled   in   the   breeze.     Here    gigantic   gnarled   fig-

^  See  the  glowing  description  in  Stanley's  Sinai  and  Palestine,
2  **  By  the  longer  footpath  it  is  1,310  yards,  and  by  the  main  camel  road  perhaps
a  little  farther."     Josephus  calculates  the  distance  from  the  city  evidently  to  the  top
of  Mount  Olivet  at  1,010  yards,  or  5  furlongs.     See  City  of  the  Great  King^  p.  59.


8  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

trees  twisted  themselves  out  of  rocky  soil  ;  there  clusters
of  palms  raised  their  knotty  stems  high  up  into  waving
plumed  tufts,  or  spread,  bush-like,  from  the  ground,  the
rich-coloured  fruit  bursting  in  clusters  from  the  pod.  Then
there  were  groves  of  myrtle,  pines,  tall,  stately  cypresses,
and  on  the  summit  itself  two  gigantic  cedars.  To  these
shady  retreats  the  inhabitants  would  often  come  from  Jeru-
salem to  take  pleasure  or  to  meditate,  and  there  one  of
their  most  celebrated  Rabbis  was  at  one  time  wont  in  pre-
ference to  teach/  Thither,  also,  Christ  with  His  disciples
often  resorted.

Coming  from  Bethany  the  city  would  be  for  some  time
completely  hidden  from  view  by  the  intervening  ridge  of
Olivet.  But  a  sudden  turn  of  the  road,  where  ''  the  descent
of  the  Mount  of  Olives  "  begins,  all  at  once  a  first  glimpse
of  Jerusalem  is  caught,  and  that  quite  close  at  hand.  True,
the  configuration  of  Olivet  on  the  right  would  still  hide
the  Temple  and  most  part  of  the  city ;  but  across  Ophel,
the  busy  suburb  of  the  priests,  the  eye  might  range  to
Mount  Zion,  and  rapidly  climb  its  height  to  where  Herod's
palace  covered  the  site  once  occupied  by  that  of  David.  A
few  intervening  steps  of  descent,  where  the  view  of  the  city
has  again  been  lost,  and  the  pilgrim  would  hurry  on  to
that  ledge  of  rock.  What  a  panorama  over  which  to  roam
with  hungry  eagerness  !  At  one  glance  he  would  see  before
him  the  whole  city — its  valleys  and  hills,  its  walls  and  towers,
its  palaces  and  streets,  and  its  magnificent  Temple — almost
like  a  vision  from  another  world.  There  could  be  no  difficulty
in  making  out  the  general  features  of  the  scene.     Altogether

^  R.  Jochanan  ben  Saccai,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  Sanhedrim  immedi?wtely
before  and  after  the  destruction  of  Jemsaiem.


yerusalem  and  the  Te7nple.  9

the  city  was  only  thirty-three  stadia,  or  about  four  English
miles,  in  circumference.  Within  this  compass  dwelt  a
population  of  600,000  (according  to  Tacitus),  but,  according
to  the  Jewish  historian,  amounting  at  the  time  of  the  Pass-
over to  between  two  and  three  millions,  or  about  equal  to
that  of  London.^

The  first  feature  to  attract  attention  would  be  the
city  walls,  at  the  time  of  Christ  only  two  in  number.^
The  first,  or  old  wall,  began  at  the  north-western  angle  of
Zion,  at  the  tower  of  HippicuSy  and  ran  along  the  northern
brow  of  Zion,  where  it  crossed  the  cleft,  and  joined  the
western  colonnade  of  the  Temple  at  the  '^  Council-house.'*
It  also  enclosed  Zion  along  the  west  and  the  south,  and
was  continued  eastward  around  Ophel,  till  it  merged  in  the
south-eastern  angle  of  the  Temple.  Thus  the  first  w^all
would  defend  Zion,  Ophel,  and,  along  with  the  Temple  walls,
Moriah  also.  The  second  wall,  which  commenced  at  a  gate
in  the  first  wall,  called  *^  Gennath,"  ran  first  north,  and  then
east,  so   as  to  enclose  Acra,  and   terminated   at  the  Tower

^  Mr.  Fergusson,  in  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible^  i.  p.  1025,  controverts
these  numbers,  on  the  ground  of  the  population  of  modern  cities  within  a  given
area.  But  two  millions  represent  not  the  ordinary  population,-  only  the  festive
throngs  at  the  Passover.  Taking  into  consideration  Eastern  habits — the  sleeping
on  the  roof,  and  possibly  the  camping  out — the  computation  is  not  extravagant.
Besides,  however  untruthful  Josephus  was,  he  may,  as  a  general  rule,  be  trusted
where  official  numbers,  capable  of  verification,  are  concerned.  In  fact,  taking
into  account  this  extraordinary  influx,  the  Rabbis  distinctly  state,  that  during  the
feasts — except  on  the  first  night — the  people  might  camp  outside  Jerusalem,  but
within  the  limits  of  a  sabbath-day's  journey.  This,  as  Otho  well  remarks  {Lex,
Rabb.  p.  195),  also  explains  how,  on  such  occasions,  our  Lord  so  often  retired  to
the  Mount  of  Olives.

2  The  third,  largest,  and  strongest  v/all,  which  enclosed  Bezetha^  or  the  New
Town,  was  built  by  Herod  Agrippa,  twelve  years  after  the  date  of  the
crucifixion.


lO         The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

of  Antonia.  Thus  the  whole  of  the  old  city  and  the
Temple  were  sufficiently  protected.

The  Tower  of  Antonia  was  placed  at  the  north-western
angle  of  the  Temple,  midway  between  the  castle  of  the
same  name  and  the  Temple.  With  the  former  it  com-
municated by  a  double  set  of  cloisters,  with  the  latter  by
a  subterranean  passage  into  the  Temple  itself,  and  also  by
cloisters  and  stairs  descending  into  the  northern  and  the
western  porches  of  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles.  Some  of  the
most  glorious  traditions  in  Jewish  history  were  connected
with  this  castle,  for  there  had  been  the  ancient  "  armoury
of  David,"  the  palace  of  Hezekiah  and  of  Nehemiah,  and
the  fortress  of  the  Maccabees.  But  in  the  days  of  Christ
Antonia  was  occupied  by  a  hated  Roman  garrison,  which
kept  watch  over  Israel,  even  in  its  sanctuary.  In  fact,  the
Tower  of  Antonia  overlooked  and  commanded  the  Temple,
so  that  a  detachment  of  soldiers  could  at  any  time  rush
down  to  quell  a  riot,  as  on  the  occasion  when  the  Jews
had  almost  killed  Paul.^  The  city  walls  were  further
defended  by  towers — sixty  in  the  first,  and  forty  in  the
second  wall.  Most  prominent  among  them  were  Hippicus,
Phasaelus,  and  Mariamne,  close  by  each  other,  to  the
north-west  of  Zion — all  compactly  built  of  immense  marble
blocks,  square,  strongly  fortified,  and  surmounted  by  build-
ings defended  by  battlements  and  turrets.^  They  were
built  by  Herod,  and  named  after  the  friend  and  the  brother
he  had  lost  in  battle,  and  the  wife  whom  his  jealousy  had
killed.

If  the  pilgrim  scanned  the  city  more  closely  he  would
observe  that  it  was  built  on  four  hills.  Of  these,  the
1  Acts  xxi.  31.       2  jTor  particulars  of  these  forts,  see  Josephus's  Wars^  v.  4,  3.


yerusalem  and  the  Temple.  ii

western,  or  ancient  Zion,  was  the  highest,  rising  about  200  feet
above  Moriah,  though  still  100  feet  lower  than  the  Mount  of
Olives.     To  the  north  and  the  east,  opposite  Zion,  and  divided
from  it  by  the  deep  Tyropoeon  Valley,  were  the  crescent-shaped
Acra  and  Moriah,  the  latter  with  Ophel  as  its  southern  out-
runner.    Up  and  down  the  slopes  of  Acra  the  Lower  City
crept.    Finally,  the  fourth  hill,  Bezetha  (from  bezaio7iy  marshy
ground),  the  New  Town,  rose  north  of  the  Temple  Mount
and  of  Acra,  and  was  separated  from  them  by  an  artificial
valley.     The  streets,  which,  as  in  all  Eastern  cities,  were  nar-
row, were  paved  with  white  marble.     A  somewhat  elevated
footway  ran  along  for  the  use  of  those  who  had  newly  been
purified  in  the  Temple,  while  the  rest  walked  in  the  roadway
below.    The  streets  derived  their  names  mostly  from  the  gates
to  which  they  led,  or  from  the  various  bazaars.     Thus  there
were  **  Water-street,"  "  Fish-street,"  "  East-street,"  etc.     The
**  Timber  Bazaar  "  and  that  of  the  "  Tailors  "  were  in*the  New
City  ;  the  Grand  Upper  Market  on  Mount  Zion.     Then  there
were  the  "  Wool "  and  the  *'  Braziers'  Bazaar  ;"  "  Baker-street,"
**  Butcher-street,"  "  Strangers'-street,"  and  many  others  simi-
larly named.     Nor  would  it  have  been  difficult  to  identify  the
most  prominent  buildings  in  the  city.     At  the  north-western
angle  of  Mount  Zion,  the  ancient  Salem  and  Jebus,  on  the  site  of
the  castle  of  David,  was  the  grand  palace  of  Herod,  generally
occupied  by  the  Roman  procurators  during  their  temporary
sojourn  in  Jerusalem.     It  stood  high  up,  just  within  shelter
of  the  great  towers  which  Herod  had  reared — a  marvel  of
splendour,  of  whose  extent,  strength,  height,  rooms,  towers,
roofs,  porticoes,  courts,  and  adjacent  gardens  Josephus  speaks
in  such  terms  of  admiration.

At  the  opposite,  or  north-eastern  corner  of  Mount  Zion,  was


12  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

the  palace  of  the  High  Priest.  Being  built  on  the  slope  of  the
hill,  there  was  under  the  principal  apartments  a  lower  story,
with  a  porch  in  front,  so  that  we  can  understand  how  on  that
eventful  night  Peter  was  ''  beneath  in  the  palace."^  Beyond  it,
probably  on  the  slope  of  Acra,  was  the  Repository  of  the
Archives,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  cleft,  abutting  on  the
Temple,  with  which  it  was  probably  connected  by  a  colon-
nade, the  Council  Chamber  of  the  Sanhedrim.  Following  the
eastern  brow  of  Mount  Zion,  south  of  the  High  Priest's  palace,
and  opposite  the  Temple,  was  the  immense  Xystus,  which
probably  extended  into  the  Tyropoeon.  Whatever  may  have
been  its  original  purpose,^  it  was  afterwards  used  as  a  place
of  public  meetings,  where,  on  great  occasions,  the  populace
was  harangued.  Here  Peter  probably  addressed  the  three
thousand  converts  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  when  the  multitude
had  hurried  thither  from  the  Temple  on  hearing  "the  mighty
rushing  sound."  The  Xystus  was  surrounded  by  a  covered
colonnade.  Behind  it  was  the  palace  of  Agrippa,  the  ancient
palace  of  David  and  of  the  Maccabees,  and  again,  in  the  rear
of  it,  that  of  Bernice.  On  Acra  stood  afterwards  the  palaces
of  certain  foreign  princes,  such  as  those  of  Queen  Helena,
King  Monobasus,  and  other  proselytes.  In  this  quarter,
or  even  beyond  it  to  the  north-west,  one  would  naturally
look  for  the  Theatre  and  the  Amphitheatre,  which,  being  so
essentially  un-Jewish,  must  have  been  located  as  far  as  pos-
sible from  the  Temple.  The  space  around  the  Temple  was
no  doubt  kept  clear  of  buildings.  On  the  south-eastern
corner  behind  it  was  the  great  Sheep  Market,  and  to  the  south

^  Mark  xiv.  66.

2  Barclay  suggests  that  the  Xystus  had  originally  been  the  heathen  gymnasium
built  by  the  infamous  high-priest  Jason     {City  of  the  Great  Kittg,  p.  loi).


Jerusalem  and  the  Temple.  13

of  it  the  Hippodrome.  Originally,  "the  king's  house  by
the  horse-gate/'  built  by  Solomon,  and  the  royal  stables,  had
occupied  the  southern  area  of  the  Temple  Mount,  where
Herod  after^vards  built  the  ''  Royal  Porch."  For  the  Temple
of  Solomon  was  300  feet  shorter,  from  north  to  souih,  than
that  of  Herod.  Transversely,  between  Xystus  and  the  Fish
Gate,  lay  the  quarter  of  Maktesh^"  occupied  by  various
bazaars,  chiefly  connected  with  the  Temple.  Lastly,  south
of  the  Temple,  but  on  the  same  hill,  was  Ophel^  the  crowded
suburb  of  the  priests.

In  this  hasty  survey  of  the  city  no  notice  has  been  taken
t)f  the  magnificent  monuments  and  pillars  erected  in  various
parts  of  Jerusalem,  nor  of  its  synagogues,  of  which  tradition
fixes  the  number  at  from  460  to  480  ;  nor  of  many  public
buildings ;  nor  yet  of  such  sacred  spots  as  the  Pool  of
Siloam,  or  that  of  Bethesda,  on  which  the  memory  loves
to  dwell.  In  sharp  contrast  to  all  this  beauty  and  mag-
nificence must  have  been  the  great  walls  and  towers,  and
the  detached  forts,  which  guarded  either  the  Temple  or  access
to  the  various  hills  on  which  the  city  rose,  such  as  Millo,
Ophel,  and  others.  Of  these  the  highest  and  strongest  was
the  L-shaped  Tower  of  Antonia,  which  rose  to  a  height  of  105
feet,  being  itself  reared  on  a  rock  75  feet  high.  Indeed,  the
towers  and  the  castle  of  Antonia,  with  its  squares,  out-
buildings, and  colonnades,  must  have  looked  almost  like  a
small  town,  on  its  rocky  height.  Beyond  the  city,  numerous
large  gates  opened  everywhere  into  the  country,  upon  the
slopes  and  crests  of  hills  covered  by  delicious  gardens  and
dotted  with  beautiful  villas.

Such  must  have  been  a  first  view  of  Jerusalem,  as  *'  beheld  "

1  Zeph.  i.  10,  II,


14         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

from  the  Mount  of  Olives,  on  which  we  are  supposed  to  have
taken  our  stand.  If  Jewish  tradition  on  the  subject  may
be  trusted,  a  gate  opened  upon  this  Mount  of  OHves  through
the  eastern  wall  of  the  Temple.^  It  is  called  "  the  Shushan
Gate,"  from  the  sculptured  representation  over  it  of  the  city
to  which  so  many  Jewish  memories  attached.  From  this  gate
an  arched  roadway,  by  which  the  priests  brought  out  the
**  red  heifer,"  and  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  the  scapegoat,
is  said  to  have  conducted  to  the  Mount  of  Olives.  Near  the
spot  where  the  red  heifer  was  burned  were  extensive  lava-
tories, and  booths  for  the  sale  of  articles  needed  for  various
purifications.  Up  a  crest,  on  one  of  the  most  commanding
elevations,  was  the  Lunar  Station,  whence,  by  fire  signals,
the  advent  of  each  new  moon  was  telegraphed  from  hill  to
hill  into  far  countries.  If  Jewish  tradition  may  further  be
trusted,  there  was  also  an  unused  gate  in  the  Temple  towards
the  north — Tedi  or  Tere — and  two  gates  towards  the  south.
We  know  for  certain  of  only  a  subterranean  passage  which
led  from  the  fortress  Antonia  on  the  "  north-western  angle "
of  the  Temple  into  the  Temple  Court,  and  of  the  cloisters  with
stairs  descending  into  the  porches,  by  one  of  which  the  chief
captain  Lysias  rushed  to  the  rescue  of  Paul  when  nearly  killed
by  the  infuriated  multitude.  Dismissing  all  doubtful  ques-
tions, we  are  sure  that  at  any  rate  five  gates  opened  into
the  outer  Temple  enclosure  or  Court  of  the  Gentiles — one
from  the  south,  and  four — and  these  the  principal — from  the
west.  That  southern  gate  was  double,  and  must  have
chiefly  served  the  convenience  of  the  priests.  Coming  from
Ophel,  they  would  pass  through  its   gigantic  archway  and

^  In  the  chamber  above  this  gate  two  standard  measures  were  kept,  avowedly
for  the  use  of  the  workmen  employed  in  the  Temple,     {Chel.  xvii.  9.)


yerusalem  and  the  Temple.  15

vestibule  (40  feet  each  way),  and  then  by  a  double  tunnel
nearly  200  feet  long,  whence  they  emerged  at  a  flight  of  steps
leading  straight  up  from  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles  into  that  of
the  priests,  close  to  the  spot  where  they  would  officiate/

But  to  join  the  great  crowd  of  worshippers  we  have
to  enter  the  city  itself.  Turning  our  back  on  Mount  Zion
we  now  face  eastwards  to  Mount  Moriah.  Though  we
look  towards  the  four  principal  entrances  to  the  Temple,
yet  what  we  see  within  those  walls  on  the  highest  of  the
terraces  is  not  the  front  but  the  back  of  the  sanctuary.
It  is  curious  how  tradition  is  here  in  the  most  palpable  error
in  turning  to  the  east  in  worship.  The  Holy  Place  itself  faced
eastwards,  and  was  approached  from  the  east ;  but  most
assuredly  the  ministering  priests  and  the  worshippers  looked
not  towards  the  east  but  towards  the  west.

The  Temple  plateau  had  been  artificially  levelled  at  immense
labour  and  cost,  and  enlarged  by  gigantic  substructures.  The
latter  served  also  partly  for  the  purpose  of  purification,  as
otherwise  there  might  have  been  some  dead  body  beneath,
which,  however  great  the  distance  from  the  surface,  would,
unless  air  had  intervened,  have,  according  to  tradition,  defiled
the  whole  place  above.  As  enlarged  by  Herod  the  Great,
the  Temple  area  occupied  an  elongated  square  of  from  925  to
950  feet  and  upwards.^     Roughly  calculating  it  at  about  1,000

1  Jewish  tradition  mentions  the  following  five  as  the  outer  gates  of  the  Temple  :
that  oi  Shushan  to  the  east,  of  Tedi  to  the  north,  of  Copponus  to  the  west,  and  the
two  Hiddah  gates  to  the  south.  The  Shushan  gate  was  said  to  have  been  lower
than  the  others,  so  that  the  priests  at  the  end  of  the  "heifer-bridge  "  might  look  over
it  into  the  Temple.  In  a  chamber  above  the  Shushan  gate,  the  standard  measures
of  the  "  cubit  "  were  kept.

2  Many  modem  writers  have  computed  the  Temple  area  at  only  606  feet,  while
Jewish  authorities  make  it  much  larger  than  we  have  stated  it.     The  compulation


t6         The  Templey  its  Ministry  and  Services.

feet,  this  would  give  an  extent  more  than  one-half  greater
than  the  length  of  St.  Peter's  at  Rome,  which  measures  613  feet,
and  nearly  double  our  own  St.  Paul's,  whose  extreme  length
is  520^  feet.  And  then  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  Temple
plateau  was  not  merely  about  1,000  feet  in  length,  but  a  square
of  nearly  1,000  feet !  It  was  not,  however,  in  the  centre  of  this
square,  but  towards  the  north-west,  that  the  Temple  itself
and  its  special  courts  were  placed.  Nor,  as  already  hinted,
were  they  all  on  a  level,  but  rose  terrace  upon  terrace,
till  the  sacred  edifice  itself  was  reached,  its  porch  protrud-
ing, *'  shoulder-Hke,"  on  either  side — perhaps  rising  into  two
flanking  towers — and  covering  the  Holy  and  Most  Holy
Places.  Thus  must  the  *^  golden  fane  '^  have  been  clearly
visible  from  all  parts ;  the  smoke  of  its  sacrifices  slowly  curl-
ing up  against  the  blue  eastern  sky,  and  the  music .  of  its
services  wafted  across  the  busy  city,  while  the  sunlight  glittered
on  its  gilt  roofs,  or  shone  from  its  pavement  of  tesselated
marble,  or  threw  great  shadows  on  Olivet  behind.

Assuredly,  when  the  Rabbis  thought  of  their  city  in  her
glory,  they  might  well  say :  '*  The  world  is  like  unto  an  eye.
The  ocean  surrounding  the  world  is  the  white  of  the  eye ;
its  black  is  the  world  itself;  the  pupil  is  Jerusalem ;  but  the
image  within  the  pupil  is  the  sanctuary."  In  their  sorrow  and
loneliness  they  have  written  many  fabled  things  of  Jerusalem,
of  which  some  may  here  find  a  place,  to  show  with  what
halo  of  reverence  they  surrounded  the  loving  memories  of  the
past.  Jerusalem,  they  say,  belonged  to  no  tribe  in  par-
ticular— it  was  all  Israel's.  And  this  is  in  great  measure
literally   true  ;    for    even    afterwards,    when    ancient    Jebus

in  the  text  is  based  on  the  latest  and  most  trustworthy  investigations,  and  fully
borne  out  by  the  excavations  made  on  the  spot  by  Capts.  Wilson  and  Warren.


Jerusalem  and  the   Temple.  17

became  the  capital  of  the  land,  the  boundary  line  between
Judah  and   Benjamin  ran  right  through  the   middle  of  the
city   and    of    the  Temple  ;    so    that,    according    to   Jewish
tradition,  the  porch  and  the  sanctuary  itself  were  in  Benjamin,
and    the  Temple    courts   and    altar    in   Judah.      In    Jeru-
salem  no  house    might  be  hired.     The  houses   belonged   as
it  were  to  all  ;  for  they  must   all  be  thrown  open,  in  freev.
hearted   hospitality,   to  the    pilgrim-brethren    that   came   up
to  the  feast.     Never  had  any  one  failed  to  find  in  Jerusalem
the   means    of    celebrating   the    paschal   festivities,    nor   yet
had  any  lacked  a  bed  on  which  to  rest.     Never  did  serpent
or  scorpion  hurt  within  her  precincts  ;  never  did  fire  desolate
her   streets,    nor   ruin   occur.      No   ban  ever  rested   on   the
Holy    City.      It   was    Levitically    more    sacred    than    other
cities,   since  there  alone  the  paschal  lamb,  the  thank-offer-
ings, and  the  second  tithes    might  be    eaten.     Hence   they
carefully  guarded    against   all   possibility  of  pollution.     No
dead  body  might  remain  in  the    city  overnight  ;    no  sepul-
chres were  there,  except  those  of  the  house  of  David  and
of  the  prophetess  Huldah.     Not  even  domestic  fowls  might
be  kept,  nor  vegetable  gardens  be  planted,  lest  the  smell  of
decaying  vegetation  should  defile  the  air ;  nor  yet  furnaces
be   built,  for  fear  of  smoke.     Never   had   adverse   accident
interrupted    the    services    of    the    sanctuary,    nor    profaned
the   offerings.      Never    had    rain    extinguished  the   fire    on
the  altar,  nor  contrary  wind  driven  back  the  smoke  of  the
sacrifices  ;  nor  yet,  however  great  the  crowd  of  worshippers,
had    any  failed    for   room   to   bow   down    and   worship    the
God  of  Israel !

Thus  far  the  Rabbis.     All  the  more  impressive   is  their
own  admission  and  their  lament — so   significant   as  viewed


iS         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

in  the  light  of  the  Gospel:  '' For  three  years  and  a-half
abode  the  Shechinah"  (or  visible  Divine  presence)  '^on  the
Mount  of  Olives," — waiting  whether  Israel  would  repent —
"  and  calling  upon  them,  '  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  He
may  be  found,  call  upon  Him  while  He  is  near.*  And
when  all  was  in  vain,  then  the  Shechinah  returned  to  its
own  place ! "

The  Shechinah  has  withdrawn  to  its  own  place !  Both
the  city  and  the  Temple  have  been  laid  ''  even  with  the
ground,"  because  Jerusalem  knew  not  the  time  of  her
visitation.^  ''They  have  laid  Jerusalem  on  heaps."^  ''The
stones  of  the  sanctuary  are  poured  out  in  the  top  of  every
street."^  All  this,  and  much  more,  did  the  Saviour,  the  right-
ful King  of  Israel,  see  in  the  near  future,  when  "  He  beheld
the  city  and  wept  over  it."  And  now  we  must  search  very
deep  down,  sinking  the  shaft  from  60  to  over  125  feet  through
the  rubbish  of  accumulated  ruins,  before  reaching  at  last
the  ancient  foundations.^  And  there,  close  by  where  once  the
royal  bridge  spanned  the  deep  chasm  and  led  from  the  city
of  David  into  the  royal  porch  of  the  Temple,  is  "the  Jews*
Wailing  Place,"  where  the.  mourning  heirs  to  all  this  deso-
lation reverently  embrace  the  fallen  stones,  and  weep  unavail-
ing tears — unavailing  because  the  present  is  as  the  past,  and
because  what  brought  that  judgment  and  sorrow  is  unrecog-
nised, unrepented,  unremoved.  Yet — "Watchman,  what  of
the  night  }  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  }  The  watch-
man said.  The  morning  cometh,  and  also  the  night.  If
ye  will  inquire,  inquire  !     Return,  come  !  "

*  Luke  xix.  44.  2  psalm  Ixxix.  i.  ^  Lament  iv.  Ir

*  Recovery  of  Jerusalem^  p.  1 85.


CHAPTER  II.

WITHIN  THE  HOLY  PLACE,

**There  shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon  another,  that  shall  not  be  thrown
down." — Matthew  xxiv.  2.

OF  the  four  principal  entrances  into  the  Temple — all  of
them  from  the  west — the  most  northerly  descended,
perhaps  by  flights  of  steps,  into  the  Lower  City  ;  while  two
others  led  into  the  suburb,  or  Parbar^  as  it  is  called.  But
by  far  the  most  magnificent  avenue  was  that  at  the  south-
western angle  of  the  Temple.  Probably  this  was  *'  the
ascent  .  .  .  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,''  which  so  astounded
the  Queen  of  Sheba.^  It  would,  indeed,  be  difficult  to
exaggerate  the  splendour  of  this  approach.  A  colossal
bridge  on  arches  spanned  the  intervening  Valley  of  the
Tyropoeon,  connecting  the  ancient  City  of  David  with  what
is  called  the  "  Royal  Porch  of  the  Temple."  From  its  ruins
we  can  reconstruct  this  bridge.  Each  arch  spanned  41 J  feet,
and  the  spring-stones  measured  24  feet  in  length  by  6  in
thickness.      It    is    almost   impossible   to   realise   these   pro-

^  I  Kings  X.  5.  According  to  Mr.  Lewin,  however  {Siege  of  Jerusalem^  p.  270},
this  celebrated  '*ascent"  to  the  houseof  the  Lord  went  up  by  a  double  subterranean
passage,  250  feet  long  and  62  feet  wide,  by  a  flight  of  steps  from  the  nev/  palace
of  Solomon,  afterwards  occupied  by  the  ** Royal  Porch,"  right  into  the  inner
court  of  the  Temple.


20         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

portions,  except  by  a  comparison  with  other  buildings.  A
single  stone  24  feet  long  !  Yet  these  were  by  no  means
the  largest  in  the  masonry  of  the  Temple.  Both  at  the
south-eastern  and  the  south-western  angles  stones  have  been
found  measuring  from  20  to  40  feet  in  length,  and  weighing
above  100  tons.

The  view  from  this  ^'  Royal  Bridge  *'  must  have  been
splendid.  It  was  over  it  that  they  led  the  Saviour,  in  sight
of  all  Jerusalem,  to  and  from  the  palace  of  the  high-priest,
that  of  Herod,  the  meeting-place  of  the  Sanhedrim,  and  the
judgment-seat  of  Pilate.  Here  the  city  would  have  lain
spread  before  us  like  a  map.  Beyond  it  the  eye  would  wander
over  straggling  suburbs,  orchards,  and  many  gardens — fairest
among  them  the  royal  gardens  to  the  south,  the  **  garden
of  roses,"  so  celebrated  by  the  Rabbis — till  the  horizon
was  bounded  by  the  hazy  outhne  of  mountains  in  the  dis-
tance. Over  the  parapet  of  the  bridge  we  might  have
looked  into  the  Tyropoeon  Valley  below,  a  depth  of  not
less  than  225  feet.  The  roadway  which  spanned  this  cleft
for  a  distance  of  354  feet,  from  Mount  Moriah  to  Mount
Zion  opposite,  was  50  feet  broad,  that  is,  about  5  feet  wider
than  the  central  avenue  of  the  Royal  Temple-Porch  into
which  it  led.  These  *'  porches,''  as  they  are  called  in  the
New  Testament,  or  cloisters,  were  among  the  finest  archi-
tectural features  of  the  Temple.  They  ran  all  round  the
inside  of  its  wall,  and  bounded  the  outer  enclosure  of  the
Court  of  the  Gentiles.  They  consisted  of  double  rows  of
Corinthian  pillars,  all  rrionoliths,  wholly  cut  out  of  one
block  of  marble,  each  pillar  being  37^  feet  high.  A  flat
roof,  richly  ornamented,  rested  against  the  wall,  in  which
also  the  outer  row  of  pillars  was  inserted.     Possibly  there


Witfiin  the  Holy  Place.  2t

may  have  been  towers^  where  one  colonnade  joined  the
other.  But  the  '*  Roya*l  Porch/'  by  which  we  are  supposed
to  have  entered  the  Temple,  was  the  most  splendid,  consisting
not  as  the  others,  of  a  double,  but  of  a  trei?/e  colonnade,
formed  of  162  pillars,  ranged  in  four  rows  of  40  pillars  each,
the  two  odd  pillars  serving  as  a  kind  of  screen,  where  the
"Porch"  opened  upon  the  bridge.  Indeed,  we  may  regard
the  Royal  Porch  as  consisting  of  a  central  nave  45  feet  wide,
with  gigantic  pillars  lOO  feet  high,  and  of  two  aisles  30  feet
wide,  with  pillars  50  feet  high.^  By  very  competent
authorities  this  Royal  Porch,  as  its  name  indicates,  is
regarded  as  occupying  the  site  of  the  ancient  palace  of
Solomon,  to  which  he  "  brought  up  "  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh.
Here  also  had  been  the  "stables  of  Solomon."  When  Herod
the  Great  rebuilt  the  Temple,  he  incorporated  with  it  this
site  of  the  ancient  rcf^al  palace.  What  the  splendour  and
height^  of  this  one  porch  in  the  Temple  must  have  been  is
best  expressed  in  the  words  of  Captain  Wilson  :^  "It  is
almost  impossible  to  realise  the  effect  which  would  be  pro-
duced by  a  building  longer  and  higher  than  York  Cathedral,
standing  on  a  solid  mass  of  masonry  almost  equal  in  height
to  the  tallest  of  our  church  spires."  And  this  was  only  one  of
the  porches  which  formed  the  southern  enclosure  of  the  first
and  outermost  court  of  the  Temple — that  of  the  Gentiles.
The  view  from  the  top  of  this  colonnade  into  Kedron  was  to
the  stupendous  depth  of  450  feet.  Here  some  have  placed
that  pinnacle  of  the  Temple  to  which  the  tempter  brought
our  Saviour.

^  The  suggestion  is  that  of  Dr.  Barclay,  in  his  City  of  the  Great  King^
2  Mr.  Fergusson,  in  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  vol.  iii.  p.  I462,

*  Professor  Porter  has  calculated  it  at  440  feet.

*  Recovery  of  Jerusaletn,  p.  9.


22         The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

These  halls  or  porches  around  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles
must  have  been  most  convenient  places  for  friendly  or
religious  intercourse  —  for  meetings  or  discussions.^  Here
Jesus,  when  still  a  child,  was  found  by  His  parents  dis-
puting with  the  doctors  ;  here  He  afterwards  so  often  taught
the  people  ;  and  here  the  first  assemblies  of  the  Christians
must  have  taken  place  when,  *'  continuing  daily  with  one
accord  in  the  Temple,  .  .  .  praising  God,  and  having  favour
with  all  the  people,  .  .  .  the  Lord  added  to  the  church
daily  such  as  should  be  saved."  Especially  do  we  revert  to
Solomon's  Porch,  that  ran  along  the  eastern  wall  of  the
Temple,  and  faced  its  great  entrance.  It  was  the  only
remnant  left  of  the  Temple  built  by  the  wise  king  of  Israel.
In  this  porch  '*  Jesus  walked  *'  on  that  '*  feast  of  the  dedi-
cation,"^ when  He  "told  it  plainly,"  "I  and  my  Father
are  one  ;"  and  it  was  thither  *'that  all  the  people  ran
together "  when  "  the  notable  miracle "  on  the  lame  man
had  been  wrought  at  the  "  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  Temple."

It  was  the  rule  when  entering  the  Temple  to  pass  in  by
the  right,  and  when  leaving  it  to  go  out  by  the  left  hand.
The  great  Court  of  the  Gentiles,*  which  formed  the  lowest
or  outer  enclosure  of  the  Sanctuary,  was  paved  with  the
finest  variegated  marble.  According  to  Jewish  tradition,  it
formed  a  square  of  750  feet.  Its  name  is  derived  from  the
fact  that  it  was  open  to  all — Jews  or  Gentiles — provided
they  observed  the  prescribed  rules  of  decorum  and  rever-
ence.     In   this   court  tradition    places  eating  and   sleeping

^  According  to  Succ,  iv.  I,  benches  or  seats  were  placed  there.

^  John  X.  23.
'  '  We  have  adopted  this  name  as  in  common  use,  though    Relandus   (Aittiq,
p.  78)   rightly  objects  that  the  only  term  for  it  used  in  Jewish  writings  is  the
•'mountain  of  the  house."


PLAN  OF  THE  TEMPLE.


ji.


M


ENTRANCE  TO  ANTONIA


^-^^^^■-'Yi-^rt^fr^/^^^^^^^^


^    ^


g


^^^P"    ^


D D


I  '  O        I,  I      J   9000U  ■'O         O         Q     t


COURT  OF  THE  GENTILES.


PM^JEK     &Y  ,^HH  _.gtCHT.


.*>>•


/


.0.

•o;

;o;  \

\J,
•0-


ROYAL  PORCH


y</................../../.../../...X...^^^^


OPHEL  CATC


A.  Royal  Tyropoeon  Bridge.

B  8.  etc  Terrace,  or  Chel,  outside  of  which  tradi-
tion places  a  low  enclosure,  called  the  Soreg.

C  C  c.  South  Side  Gates,  the  second  on  the  right
hand  being  the  ancient  Water  Gate.

D  D  D.  North  Side  Gates.

E  E  E  E.   Money  Chests.

F  F.  Courts  and  Chambers.


G.  Nicanor  Gate.

H.  Fifteen  Steps  of  the  Levites.

I.    House  of  Stoves.

J.    Steps  of  the  Priests.

K.  To  Mount   Zion.

L.   Shushan  Gate,  with  arched  roadway,  to  Mount

of  Olives  (?)
M.  To  Bezetha.


-^h


24         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.


apartments  for  the  Levites,  and  a  synagogue.  But,  de-
spite pharisaic  punctiliousness,  the  noise,  especially  on  the
eve  of  the  Passover,  must  have  been  most  disturbing.
For  there  the  oxen,  sheep,  and  doves  selected  as  fit  for
sacrifices  were  sold  as  in  a  market  ;  and  here  were  those
tables  of  the  money-changers  which  the  Lord  overthrew
when  He  drove  from  His  Father's  house  them  that  bought
and  sold.^  Within  a  short  distance,  in  the  court,  a  marble
screen  4I  feet  high,  and  beautifully  ornamented,  bore  Greek
and  Latin  inscriptions,  warning  Gentiles  not  to  proceed  on
pain  of  death.  One  of  those  very  tablets,  bearing  almost
the  same  words  as  those  given  by  Josephus,  has  been  dis-
covered in  late  excavations.  It  was  because  they  thought
Paul  had  infringed  this  order,  that  the  infuriated  multitude
**went  about  to  kill  him/'^  Beyond  this  enclosure  a  flight
of  fourteen  steps,  each  9  inches  high,  led  up  to  a  terrace
15  feet  broad,  called  the  '*  Chel,"  which  bounded  the  inner  wall
of  the  Temple.  We  are  now  approaching  the  Sanctuary  itself,
which  consisted,  first,  of  three  courts,  each  higher  than  the
former,  and,  beyond  them,  of  the  Holy  and  Most  Holy  Places
with  their  outbuildings.  Entering  by  the  principal  gate  on  the
east  ^t  pass,  first  into  the  Court  of  the  Women,  thence  into
that  of  Israel,  and  from  the  latter  into  that  of  the  Priests.  This
would  have  been,  so  to  speak,  the  natural  way  of  advancing.
But  there  was  a  nearer  road  into  the  Court  of  the  Priests.
For  both  north  and  south,  along  the  terrace,  flights  of  steps  led
up  to  three  gates  (both  north  and  south),  which  opened  into
the  Court  of  the  Priests,  while  a  fourth  gate  (north  and  south)
led  into  the  middle  of  the  Court  of  the  Women.  Thus  there
were  nine  gates  opening  from  ''  the  Terrace "  into  the  Sanc-

}  3i[att.  xxi,  12 ;  John  ii.  14.     Compare  also  especially  jfer^  Chag,  78  a^
*  Acts  xxi.  31.


Within  the  Holy  Place.  25

tuary — the  principal  one  from  the  east,  and  four  north  and
south,  of  which  one  (north  and  south)  also  led  into  the  Court
of  the  Women,  and  the  other  three  (north  and  south)  into
that  of  the  Priests.

These  eight  side  gates,  as  we  may  call  them,  were  all  two-
leaved,  wide,  high,  with  superstructures  and  chambers  sup-
ported by  two  pillars,  and  covered  with  gold  and  silver
plating.  But  far  more  magnificent  thar^  any  of  them  was
the  ninth  or  eastern  gate,  which  formed  the  principal  entrance
into  the  Temple.  The  ascent  to  it  was  from  the  terrace  by
twelve  easy  steps.  The  gate  itself  was  made  of  dazzling
Corinthian  brass,  most  richly  ornamented  ;  and  so  massive
were  its  double  doors  that  it  needed  the  united  strength  of
twenty  men  to  open  and  close  them.  This  was  the  "Beautiful
Gate ; "  and  on  its  steps  had  they  been  wont  these  many
years  to  lay  the  lame  man,  just  as  privileged  beggars  now  lie
at  the  entrance  to  continental  cathedrals.  No  wonder  that
all  Jerusalem  knew  him  ;  and  when  on  that  sunny  afternoon
Peter  and  John  joined  the  worshippers  in  the  Court  of  the
Women,  not  alone,  but  in  company  with  the  well-known
cripple,  who,  after  his  healing,  was  "walking  and  leaping
and  praising  God,"  universal  "wonder  and  amazement"
must  have  been  aroused.  Then,  when  the  lame  man,  still
"holding  by"  the  apostles,  again  descended  these  steps,  we
can  readily  understand  how  all  the  people  would  crowd
around  in  Solomon's  Porch,  close  by,  till  the  sermon  of  Peter
— so  fruitful  in  its  spiritual  results — was  interrupted  by  the
Temple  police,  and  the  sudden  imprisonment  of  the  apostles.

The  Court  of  the  Women  obtained  its  name,  not  from  its
appropriation  to  the  exclusive  use  of  women,  but  because
they  were  not  allowed  to  proceed  farther,  except  for  sacri-


26         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

ficial  purposes.  Indeed,  this  was  probably  the  common  place
for  worship,  the  females  occupying,  according  to  Jewish  tradi-
tion, only  a  raised  gallery  along  three  sides  of  the  court.
This  court  covered  a  space  upwards  of  200  feet  square.
All  around  ran  a  simple  colonnade,  and  within  it,  against
the  wall,  the  thirteen  chests,  or  "trumpets,"  for  charitable
contributions  were  placed/  These  thirteen  chests  were  narrow
at  the  mouth  and  wide  at  the  bottom,  shaped  like  trumpets,
whence  their  name.  Their  specific  objects  were  carefully
marked  on  them.  Nine  were  for  the  receipt  of  what  was
legally  due  by  worshippers  ;  the  other  four  for  strictly  volun-
tary gifts.  Trumpets  I.  and  II.  were  appropriated  to  the
half-shekel  Temple-tribute  of  the  current  and  of  the  past
year.  Into  Trumpet  III.  those  women  who  had  to  bring
turtledoves  for  a  burnt  and  a  sin-offering  dropped  their
equivalent  in  money,  which  was  daily  taken  out  and  a  corre-
sponding number  of  turtledoves  offered.  This  not  only  saved
the  labour  of  so  many  separate  sacrifices,  but  spared  the
modesty  of  those  who  might  not  wish  to  have  the  occasion
or  the  circumstances  of  their  offering  to  be  publicly  known.
Into  this  trumpet  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus  must  have
dropped  the  value  of  her  offering^  when  the  aged  Simeon
took  the  infant  Saviour  "  in  his  arms  and  blessed  God.'*
Trumpet  IV.  similarly  received  the  value  of  the  offerings
of  young  pigeons.  In  Trumpet  V.  contributions  for  the
wood  used  in  the  Temple ;  in  Trumpet  VI.  for  the
incense,  and  in  Trumpet  VII.  for  the  golden  vessels  for
the  ministry  were  deposited.  If  a  man  had  put  aside  a
certain  sum  for  a  sin-offering,  and  any  money  was  left  over
after  its   purchase,   it  was  cast   into  Trumpet  VIII.     Simi-

^  It  was  probably  into  one  of  these  that  the  poor  widow  dropped  her  '*  two
mites  "  (Luke  xxi.  2).  3  Luke  ii.  22,  24.


Within  the  Holy  Place.  2^

larly  Trumpets  IX.,  X.,  XL,  XII.,  and  XIII.  were  destined
for  what  was  left  over  from  trespass-offerings,  offerings  o""
birds,  the  offering  of  the  Nazarite,  of  the  cleansed  leper,  and
voluntary  offerings.  In  all  probability  this  space  where  the
thirteen  Trumpets  were  placed  was  the  "treasury,"  where
Jesus  taught  on  that  memorable  Feast  of  Tabernacles.^  We
can  also  understand  how,  from  the  peculiar  and  known  desti-
nation of  each  of  these  thirteen  "  trumpets,"  the  Lord  could
distinguish  the  contributions  of  the  rich  who  cast  in  "of
•their  abundance"  from  that  of  the  poor  widow  who  of  her
"penury"  had  given  "all  the  living"  that  she  had.^  But
there  was  also  a  special  treasury-chamber,  into  which  at
certain  times  they  carried  the  contents  of  the  thirteen  chests ;
and,  besides,  what  was  called  "a  chamber  of  the  silent,"
whqre  devout  persons  secretly  deposited  money,  afterwards
secretly  employed  for  educating  children  of  the  pious  poor.

It  is  probably  in  ironical  allusion  to  the  form  and  name  of
these  treasure-chests  that  the  Lord,  making  use  of  the  word
"  trumpet,"  describes  the  conduct  of  those  who,  in  their
almsgiving,  sought  glory  from  men  as  "sounding  a  trumpet"
before  them^ — that  is,  carrying  before  them,  as  it  were,  in
full  display  one  of  these  trumpet-shaped  alms-boxes  (lite-
rally called  in  the  Talmud,  "  trumpets "),  and,  as  it  were,
sounding  it*

^  John  vii.  viii.,  see  specially  viii.  20.

2  Mark  xii.  41  ;  Luke  xxi.  I.  ^  Matt.  vi.  2.

*  The  allusion  is  all  the  more  pointed  when  we  bear  in  mind  that  each  of  these
trumpets  had  a  mark  to  tell  its  special  object.  It  seems  strange  that  this  inter-
pretation should  not  have  occurred  to  any  of  the  commentators,  who  have  always
found  the  allusion  such  a  crux  inter pretum.  An  article  in  the  Bible  Educator
has  since  substantially  adopted  this  view,  adding  that  trumpets  were  blown  when
the  alms  were  collected.  But  for  the  latter  statement  there  is  no  historical
authority  whatever,  and  it  would  contravene  the  religious  spirit  of  the  times.


28.         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

In  each  of  the  four  corners  of  the  Court  of  the  Women
were  chambers,  or  rather  unroofed  courts,  each  said  to  have
been  60  feet  long.  In  that  at  the  right  hand  (on  the  north-
east), the  priests  who  were  unfit  for  other  than  menial  services
on  account  of  bodily  blemishes,  picked  the  worm-eaten  wood
from  that  destined  for  the  altar.  In  the  court  at  the  farther
angle  (north-west)  the  purified  lepers  washed  before  pre-
senting themselves  to  the  priests  at  the  Gate  of  Nicanor.
At  the  left  (south-east)  the  Nazarites  polled  their  hair,
and  cooked  their  peace-offerings ;  while  in  a  fourth  court
(at  the  south-west)  the  oil  and  wine  were  kept  for  the
drink-offerings.  The  musical  instruments  used  by  the
Levites  were  deposited  in  two  rooms  under  the  Court  of
the  Israelites,  to  which  the  access  was  from  the  Court  of
the  Women.

Of  course  the  western  colonnade  of  this  court  was  open.
Thence  fifteen  easy  steps  led  through  the  so-called  Gate  of
Nicanor^  into  the  Court  of  Israel.  On  these  steps  the  Levites
were  wont  on  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  to  sing  the  fifteen
"  Psalms  of  Degrees,''  or  ascent,^  whence  some  have  derived
their  name.  Here,  or,  rather,  in  the  Gate  of  Nicanor,  all  that
was  ordered  to  be  done  **  before  the  Lord  "  took  place.  There
the  cleansed  leper  and  the  women  coming  for  purification
presented  themselves  to  the  priests,  and  there  also  the  "  water
of  jealousy ''  was  given  to  the  suspected  wife.

Perhaps  it  will  be  most  convenient  for  practical  purposes
to  regard  the  two  Courts  of  Israel  and  of  the  Priests  as  in
reality  forming  only  one^  divided    into  two  parts  by  a  low

1  Jost  (GescL  d.  Jud,,  vol.  i.  p,  142)  calls  the  Nicanor  the  gate  of  Corinthian
brass.  On  the  origin  of  the  name  see  Herzfeld,  Gesch.  d.  V.  Isr.,  vol.  i.
p.  344.  2  Psalms  cxx.  to  cxxxiv.


Within  the  Holy  Place.  29

balustrade  \\  feet  high.  Thus  viewed,  this  large  double
court,  inclusive  of  the  Sanctuary  itself,  would  measure
280J  feet  in  length  by  202\  feet  in  breadth.  Of  this  a
narrow  strip,.  16^  feet  long,  formed  the  Court  of  Israel.
Two  steps  led  up  from  it  to  the  Court  of  the  Priests.  Here
you  mounted  again  by  three  low  semicircular  steps  to  a  kind
of  pulpit  or  platform,  where,  as  well  as  on  the  "  fifteen  steps,"
the  Levites  sung  and  played  during  the  ordinary  service.
The  priests^  on  the  other  hand,  occupied,  while  pronouncing
the  blessing,  the  steps  at  the  other  end  of  the  court  which
led  up  to  the  Temple  porch.  A  similar  arrangement  existed
in  the  great  court  as  in  that  of  the  Women.  Right  and  left
of  the  Nicanor  Gate  were  receptacles  for  the  priestly  vest-
ments (one  for  each  of  the  four  kinds,  and  for  the  twenty-four
courses  of  priests  :  4  x  24  =  96).

Next  came  the  chamber  of  the  high-priesf  s  meat-offer-
ing,^ where  each  morning  before  going  to  their  duties  the
officiating  priesthood  gathered  from  the  so-called  *'  Beth-
ha-Moked,'*  or  **  house  of  stoves.'*  The  latter  was  built  on
arches,  and  contained  a  large  dining  hall  that  communi-
cated with  four  other  chambers.  One  of  these  was  a  large
apartment  where  fires  were  continually  burning  for  the  use
of  the  priests,  who  ministered  barefoot.  There  also  the
heads  of  the  ministering  courses  slept,  and  here,  in  a  special
receptacle  under  the  pavement,  the  keys  of  the  Temple
were  hung  up  at  night.  Of  the  other  three  charnbers  of  the
Beth-Moked,  one  was  appropriated  to  the  various  counter-
foils given  as  a  warrant  when  a  person  had  paid  his  due  for
a  drink-offering.  In  another  the  shewbread  was  prepared,
while  yet  a  third  served  for  the  lambs  (at  least  six  in  number)

1  Lev.  vi.  20.


30         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

that  were  always  kept  ready  for  the  regular  sacrifice.  Here
also  a  passage  led  to  the  well-lit  subterranean  bath  for  the
use  of  the  priests.  Besides  the  Beth-Moked  there  were  north
and  south  of  the  court  rooms  for  storing  the  salt  for  the  altar,
for  salting  the  skins  of  sacrifices,  for  washing  "  their  inwards,"
for  storing  the  ''clean"  wood,  for  the  machinery  by  which  the
laver  was  supplied  with  water,  and  finally  the  chamber
'*Gazith,"  or  hall  of  hewn  stones,  where  the  Sanhedrim
was  wont  to  meet.  Above  some  of  these  chambers  were
other  apartments,  such  as  those  in  which  the  high-priest
spent  the  week  before  the  Day  of  Atonement  in  study  and
meditation.

The  account  which  Jewish  tradition  gives  of  these  gates  and
chambers  around  the  Court  of  the  Priests* is  somewhat  con-
flicting, perhaps  because  the  same  chambers  and  gates  may
have  borne  different  names.  It  may,  however,  be  thus  sum-
marised. Entering  the  Great  Court  by  the  Nicanor  Gate,  there
was  at  the  right  hand  the  Chamber  of  Phinehas  with  its  96  re-
ceptacles for  priests'  vestments,  and  at  the  left  the  place  where
the  high-priest's  daily  meat-offering  was  prepared,  and  where
every  morning  before  daybreak  all  the  ministering  priests  met,
after  their  inspection  of  the  Temple  and  before  being  told
off  to  duty.  Along  the  southern  side  of  the  court  were  the
Watergate,  through  which  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  the
pitcher  with  water  was  brought  from  the  Pool  of  Siloam,
with  a  chamber  above  it,  called  Abtinas,^  where  the  priests
kept  guard  at  night ;  then  the  Gate  of  the  Firstlings,  through
which  the  firstlings  fit  to  be  offered  were  brought ;  and  the
Wood-gate,  through  which  the  altar- wood  was  carried.  Along-
side these  gates  were  Gazitky  the  hall  of  square  polished
stones,  where  the  Sanhedrim  sat ;  the  chamber  Golah,  for  the

1  The  Talmud  {^Yofna  19,  a)  expresses  a  doubt  as  to  its  exact  localisation.


Within  the  Holy  Place.  31

water  apparatus  which  emptied  and  filled  the  laver ;  and  the
wood-chamber.  Above  and  beyond  it  were  the  apartments  of
the  high-priest  and  the  council-chamber  of  the  **  honourable
councillors,"  or  priestly  council  for  affairs  strictly  connected
with  the  Temple.  On  the  northern  side  of  the  Priests'  Court
were  the  gate  Nitzutz  (Spark  Gate),  with  a  guard-chamber
above  for  the  priests,  the  Gate  of  Sacrifices,  and  the  Gate  of
the  Beth-Moked.  Alongside  these  gates  were  the  chamber
for  salting  the  sacrifices  ;  that  for  salting  the  skins  (named
Parvah  from  its  builder),  with  bath-rooms  for  the  high-priest
above  it ;  and  finally  the  Beth-Moked  with  its  apartments.
The  two  largest  of  these  buildings — the  council-chamber  of
the  Sanhedrim  at  the  south-eastern,^  and  the  Beth-Moked  at
the  north-western  angle  of  the  court — were  partly  built  into
the  court  and  partly  out  on  '^  the  terrace."  This,  because  none
other  than  a  prince  of  the  house  of  David  might  sit  down
within  the  sacred  enclosure  of  the  Priests'  Court.  Probably
there  was  a  similar  arrangement  for  the  high-priest's  apart-
ments and  the  priests'  council-chamber,  as  well  as  for  the
guard-chambers  of  the  priests,  so  that  at  each  of  the  four
corners  of  the  court  the  apartments  would  abut  upon  "  the

1  It  is  very  strange  what  mistakes  are  made  about  the  localisation  of  the  rooms
and  courts  connected  with  the  Temple.  Thus  the  writer  of  the  article  *'  Sanhedrim"
in  Kitto's  Encycl.^  vol.  iii.  p.  766,  says  that  the  hall  of  the  Sanhedrim  '*was
situate  in  the  centre  of  the  south  side  of  the  Tem])Ie-court,  the  northern  part  ex-
tending to  the  Court  of  the  Priests,  and  the  southern  part  to  the  Court  of  the
Israelites.**  But  the  Court  of  Israel  and  that  of  the  Priests  did  not  lie  north  and
south,  but  east  and  west,  as  a  glance  at  the  Temple  plan  will  show  !  The  hall  of
the  Sanhedrim  extended  indeed  south,  though  certainly  not  to  the  Court  of  Israel,
but  to  the  C^^/ or  terrace.  The  authorities  quoted  in  the  article  **Sanhedrm"
do  not  bear  out  the  writer's  conclusions.  It  ought  to  be  remarked  that  about  the
time  of  Christ  the  Sanhedrim  removed  its  sittings  from  the  Hall  of  Square  Stones
to  another  on  the  east  of  the  Temple-court.


32         The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Terrace/*^  All  along  the  colonnades,  both  around  the  Court
of  the  Gentiles  and  that  of  the  Women,  there  were  seats  and
benches  for  the  accommodation  of  the  worshippers.

The  most  prominent  object  in  the  Court  of  the  Priests
was  the  immense  altar  of  unhewn  stones,^  a  square  of  not
less  than  48  feet,  and,  inclusive  of  '*  the  horns,"  15  feet  high.
All  around  it  a  "circuit  ran"  for  the  use  of  the  ministering
priests,  who,  as  a  rule,  always  passed  round  by  the  right,
and  retired  by  the  left  ^  As  this  ''  circuit "  was  raised
9  feet  from  the  ground,  and  i\  feet  high,  while  the  ''horns"
measured  \\  feet  in  height,  the  priests  would  have  only  to  reach
3  feet  to  the  top  of  the  altar,  and  4I  feet  to  that  of  each
"horn."  An  inclined  plane,  48  feet  long  by  24  wide,  into
which  about  the  middle  two  smaller  "  descents  "  merged,  led
up  to  the  "circuit "  from  the  south.  Close  by  was  the  great
heap  of  salt,  from  which  every  sacrifice  must  be  salted  with
salt.^  On  the  altar,  which  at  the  top  was  only  36  feet  wide,
three  fires  burned,  one  (east)  for  the  offerings,  the  second
(south)  for  the  incense,  the  third  (north)  to  supply  the  means
for  kindling  the  other  two.     The  four  "  horns "  of  the  altar

^  We  know  that  the  two  priestly  guard-chambers  above  the  Water  Gate  and
Nitzutz  opened  also  upon  the  terrace.  This  may  explain  how  the  Talmud  some-
times speaks  of  six  and  sometimes  of  eight  gates  opening  from  the  Priests'  Court
upon  the  terrace,  or  else  gates  7  and  8  may  have  been  those  which  opened  from  the
terrace  north  and  south  into  the  Court  of  the  Women.

"^  They  were  ** whitened"  twice  a  year.  Once  in  seven  years  the  high-priest
was  to  inspect  the  Most  Holy  Place,  through  an  opening  made  from  the  room
above.  If  repairs  were  required,  the  workmen  were  let  down  through  the  ceiling
in  a  sort  of  cage,  so  as  not  to  see  anything  but  what  they  were  to  work  at.

3  The  three  exceptions  to  this  are  specially  mentioned  in  the  Talmud.  The
high-priest  both  ascended  and  descended  by  the  right.

.  *  Also  a  receptacle  for  such  sin-offerings  of  birds  as  had  become  spoiled.  This
inclined  plane  was  kept  covered  with  salt,  to  prevent  the  priests,  who  were
barefooted,  from  slipping.


Within  the  Holy  Place.  3.3.

were  straight,  square,  hollow  prominences,  that  at  the  souths
west  with  two  openings,  into  whose  silver  funnels  the  drink-
offerings,  and,  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  the  water  from
the  Pool  of  Siloam,  were  poured.  A  red  line  all  round  the
middle  of  the  altar  marked  that  above  it  the  blood  of
sacrifices  intended  to  be  eaten,  below  it  that  of  sacrifices
wholly  consumed,  was  to  be  sprinkled.  The  system  of
drainage  into  chambers  below  and  canals,  all  of  which  could
be  flushed  at  will,  was  perfect ;  the  blood  and  refuse  being
swept  down  into  Kedron  and  towards  the  royal  gardens.
Finally,  north  of  the  altar  were  all  requisites  for  the  sacri-
fices— six  rows,  with  four  rings  each,  of  ingenious  mechanism,
for  fastening  the  sacrifices  ;  eight  marble  tables  for  the  flesh,
fat,  and  cleaned  ''  inwards ; "  eight  low  columns,  each  with
three  hooks,  for  hanging  up  the  pieces  ;  a  marble  table  for
laying  them  out,  and  one  of  silver  for  the  gold  and  silver
vessels  of  the  service.

Between  the  altar  and  porch  of  the  Temple,  but  placed ,
towards  the  south,  was  the  immense  laver  of  brass,  supported
by  twelve  colossal  lions,  which  was  drained  every  evening,  and
filled  every  morning  by  machinery,  and  where  twelve  priests
could  wash  at  the  same  time.  Indeed  the  water  supply  to
the  Sanctuary  is  among  the  most  wonderful  of  its  arrange-
ments. That  of  the  Temple  is  designated  by  Captain  Wilson
as  the  ''  low-level  supply,"  in  contradistinction  to  the  ''  high-
level  aqueduct,''  which  collected  the  water  in  a  rock-hewn
tunnel  four  miles  long,  on  the  road  to  Hebron,  and  then
wound  along  so  as  to  deliver  water  to  the  upper  portion  of
the  city.  The  "  low-level "  aqueduct,  which  supplied  the
Temple,  derived  its  waters  from  three  sources — from  the  hills
about    ^^  bron,   from    Etham,   and    from  the  three  pools   of

D


34         ^'^^  Templey  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Solomon.  Its  total  length  was  over  forty  miles.  The
amount  of  water  it  conveyed  may  be  gathered  from  the
fact  that  the  surplusage  of  the  waters  of  Etham  is  cal-
culated, when  drained  into  the  lower  pool  of  Gihon,  to  have
presented  when  full,  ''  an  area  of  nearly  four  acres  of  water."  *
And,  as  if  this  had  not  been  sufficient,  "the  ground  is
perfectly  honeycombed  with  a  series  of  remarkable  rock-
hewn  cisterns,  in  which  the  water  brought  by  an  aqueduct
from  Solomon's  Pools,  near  Bethlehem,  was  stored.  The
cisterns  appear  to  have  been  connected  by  a  system  of
channels  cut  out  of  the  rock  ;  so  that  when  one  was  full
the  surplus  water  ran  into  the  next,  and  so  on,  till  the  final
overflow  was  carried  off  by  a  channel  into  the  Kedron.  "One
of  the  cisterns — that  known  as  the  Great  Sea — would  contain
two  million  gallons ;  and  the  total  number  of  gallons  which
could  be  stored  probably  exceeded  ten  millions.'*  There
seems  little  doubt  that  the  drainage  of  Jerusalem  was  **  as
well  managed  as  the  water  supply  ;  the  mouth  of  the  main
drain  being  in  the  valley  of  the  Kedron,  where  the  sewerage
was  probably  used  as  manure  for  the  gardens."

The  mind  becomes  bewildered  at  numbers,  the  accuracy
of  which  we  should  hesitate  to  receive  if  they  were  not  con-
firmed by  modern  investigations.  We  feel  almost  the  same
in  speaking  of  the  proportions  of  the  Holy  House  itself.  It
was  built  on  immense  foundations  of  solid  blocks  of  white
marble  covered  with  gold,  each  block  measuring,  according
to  Josephus,  6'j\  by  9  feet.  Mounting  by  a  flight  of  twelve
steps  to  the  "  Porch,"  we  notice  that  it  projected  30  feet  on
each  side  beyond  the  Temple  itself  Including  these  pro-
jections, the  buildings  of  the  Temple  were   150   feet   long,

*  See  Barclay,  City  of  the  Great  King^  pp.  292-336.


V/ithin  the  Holy  Place.  35

and  as  many  broad.  Without  them  the  breadth  was  only
90  and  the  length  120  feet.  Of  these  60  feet  in  length,  from
east  to  west,  and  30  feet  in  breadth,  belonged  to  the  Holy
Place  ;  while  the  Most  Holy  was  30  feet  long,  and  as  many
broad.  There  were,  therefore,  on  either  side  of  the  Sanctuary,
as  well  as  behind  it,  30  feet  to  spare,  which  were  occupied
by  side  buildings  three  stories  high,  each  containing  five
rooms,  while  that  at  the  back  had  eight.  These  side-build-
ings, however,  were  lower  than  the  Sanctuary  itself,  over
which  also  superstructures  had  been  reared.  A  gabled  cedar
roof,  with  golden  spikes  on  it,  and  surrounded  by  an  elegant
balustrade,  surmounted  the  whole.

The  entrance  to  the  *'  Porch,"  which  was  curiously  roofed,
was  covered  by  a  splendid  veil.  Right  and  left  were  deposi-
tories for  the  sacrificial  knives.  Within  the  ''  Porch  "  a
number  of  "  dedicated  "  gifts  were  kept,  such  as  the  golden
candelabra  of  the  proselyte  queen  of  Adiabene,  two  golden
crowns  presented  by  the  Maccabees,  etc.  Here  were  also
two  tables — one  of  marble,  on  which  they  deposited  the  new
shewbread  ;  the  other  of  gold,  on  which  they  laid  the  old
as  it  was  removed  from  the  Holy  Place.  Two-leaved  doors,^
with  gold  plating,  and  covered  by  a  rich  Babylonian  curtain
of  the  four  colours  of  the  Temple  ("  fine  linen,  blue,  scarlet,
and  purple ")  formed  the  entrance  into  the  Holy  Place.
Above  it  hung  that  symbol  of  Israel,^  a  gigantic  vine  of  pure
gold,  and  made  of  votive  offerings — each  cluster  the  height
of  a  man.  In  the  Holy  Place  were,  to  the  south,  the  golden
candlestick,  to  the  north,  the  table  of  shewbread,  and  beyond
them  the  altar  of  incense,  near  the  entrance  to   the   Most

^  There  was  also  a  small  wicket  gate  by  which  he  entered  who  opened  the  large
doors  from  within^  2  Psalm  Ixxx.  £  3  Jer.  ii.  21 ;  Ezek.  xix.  lO ;  Joel  i.  7.


$6         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Holy.  The  latter  was  now  quite  empty,  a  large  stone,  on
which  the  high-priest  sprinkled  the  blood  on  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment, occupying  the  place  where  the  ark  with  the  mercy-
seat  had  stood.  A  wooden  partition  separated  the  Most
Holy  from  the  Holy  Place;  and  over  the  door  hung  the
veil  which  was  *'  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom "
when  the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was  opened  on  Golgotha.'

Such  was  the  Temple  as  restored  by  Herod — a  work  which
occupied  forty-six  years  to  its  completion.  Yet,  though  the
Rabbis  never  weary  praising  its  splendour,  not  with  one
word  do  any  of  those  who  were  cotemporary  indicate  that
its  restoration  was  carried  out  by  Herod  the  Great.^  So
memqrable  an  event  in  their  history  is  passed  over  with  the
most  absolute  silence.  What  a  complete  answer  does  this
afford  to  the  objection  sometimes  raised  from  the  silence  of
Josephus  about  the  person  and  mission  of  Jesus!

With  what  reverence  the  Rabbis  guarded  their  Temple
will  be  described  in  the  sequel.  The  readers  of  the  New
Testament  know  how  readily  any  supposed  infringement  of
its  sanctity  led  to  summary  popular  vengeance.  To  the
disciples  of  Jesus  it  seemed  difficult  to  realise  that  such  utter
ruin  as  their  Master  foretold  could  so  soon  come  over  that
beautiful  and  glorious  house.  It  was  the  evening  of  the  day
in  which  He  had  predicted  the  utter  desolation  of  Jerusalem.
All  that  day  He  had  taught  in  the  Tempk,  and  what  He
had  said,  not  only  there,  but  when,  on  beholding  the  city,
He  wept  over  it,  seems  to  have  filled  their  minds  alike  with
awe  and  with  doubt.     And  now  He,  with  His  disciples,  had

^  Matt,  xxvii.  51.  The  Rabbis  speak  of  two  veils,  and  say  that  the  higK-priest
went  in  by  the  southern  edge  of  the  first  veil,  then  walked  along  till  he  reached
the  northern  corner  of  the  second  veil,  by  which  he  entered  the  Most  Holy  Place.

*  The  first  mention  occurs  in  the  Babylon  Talmud,  and  then  neither  gratefully
nor  graciously.     {J'aan,  23  a.  ;  Baba,  B.  3,  d.  ',  ^a.  -,  Succ,  51  ^.)


Within  the  Holy  Place.  37

*'  departed  from  the  Temple."  Once  more  they  lingered  in
sweet  retirement  "  on  the  Mount  of  Olives."^  **The  purple  light
on  the  mountains  of  Moab  was  fast  fading  out.  Across  the
city  the  sinking  sun  cast  a  rich  glow  over  the  pillared  cloisters
of  the  Temple,  and  over  the  silent  courts  as  they  rose  terrace
upon  terrace.  From  where  they  stood  they  could  see  over  the
closed  Beautiful  Gate,  and  right  to  the  entrance  to  the  Holy
Place,  which  now  glittered  with  gold  ;  while  the  eastern  walls
and  the  deep  valley  below  were  thrown  into  a  solemn  shadow,
creeping,  as  the  orb  sunk  lower,  further  and  further  towards
the  summit  of  Olivet,  irradiated  with  one  parting  gleam  of
roseate  light,  after  all  below  was  sunk  in  obscurity."^

Then  it  was  and  there  that  the  disciples,  looking  down
upon  the  Temple,  pointed  out  to  the  Master  :  "  What  manner
of  stones  and  what  buildings  are  here."  The  view  from  that
site  must  have  rendered  belief  in  the  Master's  prediction  even
more  difficult  and  more  sad,  A  few  years  more,  and  it  was
all  literally  fulfilled !  It  may  be,  as  Jewish  tradition  has
it,  that  ever  since  the  Babylonish  captivity  the  "Ark  of
the  Covenant"  lies  buried  and  concealed  underneath  the
wood-court  at  the  north-eastern  angle  of  the  "  Court  of  the
Women."  And  it  may  be  that  some  at  least  of  the  spoils
which  Titus  carried  with  him  from  Jerusalem — the  seven-
branched  candlestick,  the  table  of  shewbread,  the  priests'
trumpets,  and  the  identical  golden  mitre  which  Aaron  had
worn  on  his  forehead — are  hidden  somewhere  in  the  vaults
beneath  the  site  of  the  Temple,  after  having  successively
gone  to  Rome,  to  Carthage,  to  Byzantium,  to  Ravenna,  and
thence  to  Jerusalem.  But  of  *' those  great  buildings"  that
once  stood  there,  there  is  "  not  left  one  stone  upon  another"
that  has  not  been  ''  thrown  down."

*  Matt,  xxiv,  I,  3.  *  Bartlett,  Jerusalem  Revisited^  p.  11$,


CHAPTER    III.

TEMPLE  ORDER,   REVENUES,   AND  MUSIC.

**  For  the  bodies  of  those  beasts,  whose  blood  is  brought  into  the  sanctuary  by  the
high-priest  for  sin,  are  burned  without  the  camp.  Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that
He  might  sanctify  the  people  with  His  own  blood,  suffered  without  the  gate."
— Hebrews  xiii.  ii,  12.

TO  the  devout  and  earnest  Jew  the  second  Temple  must^
'*in  comparison  of"  "the  house  in  her  first  glory,"  have
indeed  appeared  *' as  nothing."^  True,  in  architectural
splendour  the  second,  as  restored  by  Herod,  far  surpassed  the
first  Temple.^  But,  unless  faith  had  recognised  in  Jesus  of
Nazareth  "  the  desire  of  all  nations,"  who  should  "  fill  this
house  with  glory," ^  it  would  have  been  difificult  to  draw  other
than  sad  comparisons.  Confessedly,  the  real  elements  of
Temple-glory  no  longer  existed.  The  Holy  of  Holies  was
quite  empty,  the  ark  of  the  covenant  with  the  cherubim,  the
tables  of  the  law,  the  book  of  the  covenant,  Aaron's  Tod  that
budded,  and  the  pot  of  manna,  were  no  longer  in  the  sanc-
tuary.    The  fire  that  had  descended  from  heaven  upon  the

^  Hagg.  ii.  3.

2  The  Talmud  expressly  calls  attention  to  this,  and  mentions  as  another  point
of  pre-eminence,  that  whereas  the  first  Temple  stood  410,  the  second  lasted  420
years.

*  Hagg.  ii.  7.


Temple  Order.  Revenues y  and  Music,  39

altar  was  extinct.  What  was  far  more  solemn,  the  visible
presence  of  God  in  the  Shechinah  was  wanting.^  Nor  could
the  will  of  God  be  now  ascertained  through  the  Urim  and
Thummim,  nor  even  the  high-priest,  be  anointed  with  the  holy
oil,  its  very  composition  being  unknown.  Yet  all  the  more
jealously  did  the  Rabbis  draw  lines  of  fictitious  sanctity,  and
guard  them  against  all  infringement.

In  general,  as  the  camp  in  the  wilderness  had  really  con-
$isted  of  three  parts — the  camp  of  Israel,  that  of  the  Levites,
and  that  of  God — so  they  reckoned  three  corresponding
divisions  of  the  Holy  City.  From  the  gates  to  the  Temple
Mount  was  regarded  as  the  camp  of  Israel ;  thence  to  the
gate  of  Nicanor  represented  the  camp  of  Levi  ;  while  the  rest
of  the  sanctuary  was  "  the  camp  of  God."  It  is  in  allusion
to  this  that  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  compares
Christ's  suffering  "  without  the  gate  "  of  Jerusalem  to  the
burning  of  the  sin  offerings  "  without  the  camp."  According
to  another  Rabbinical  arrangement  different  degrees  of
sanctity  attached  to  different  localities.  The  first,  or  lowest
degree,  belonged  to  the  land  of  Israel,  whence  alone  the  first
sheaf  at  the  Passover,  the  firstfruits,  and  the  two  wave-loaves
at  Pentecost  might  be  brought ;  the  next  degree  to  walled
cities  in  Palestine,  where  no  leper  nor  dead  body^  might
remain  ;  the  third  to  Jerusalem  itself,  since,  besides  many
prohibitions  to  guard  its  purity,  it  was  only  there  lawful  to
partake  of  peace-offerings,  of  the  first-fruits,  and  of  ''the
second  tithes."     Next  came,  successively,  the  Temple  Mount,

1  The  following  five  are  mentioned  by  the  Rabbis  as  wanting  in  the  last  Temple  :
the  ark,  the  holy  fire,  the  Shechinah,  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and  the  Urim  and
Thummim.

^  Luke  yii*  X2»


40         The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

from  which  all  who  were  in  a  state  of  levitical  uncleanness
were  excluded  ;  *'  the  Terrace,"  or  "  Chel,"  from  which,
besides  Gentiles,  those  who  had  become  defiled  by  contact
with  a  dead  body  were  shut  out ;  the  Court  of  the  Women,
into  which  those  who  had  been  polluted  might  not  come,
even  if  they  "  had  washed/'  till  after  they  were  also  levitically
fit  to  eat  of  "  things  sacred,"  that  is,  after  sunset  of  the
day  on  which  they  had  washed ;  the  Court  of  Israel,  into
which  those  might  not  enter  who,  though  delivered  from
their  uncleanness,  had  not  yet  brought  the  offering  for
their  purification  ;  ^  the  Court  of  the  Priests,  ordinarily  acces-
sible only  to  the  latter;  the  space  between  the  altar  and
the  Temple  itself,  from  which  even  priests  were  excluded  if
their  bearing  showed  that  they  did  not  realise  the  solemnity
of  the  place ;  the  Temple,  into  which  the  priests  might  only
enter  after  washing  their  hands  and  feet ;  and,  lastly,  the
Most  Holy  Place,  into  which  the  high-priest  alone  was
allowed  to  go,  and  that  only  once  a  year.

From  these  views  of  the  sanctity  of  the  place,  it  will  readily
be  understood  how  sufficient  outward  reverence  should  have
been  expected  of  all  who  entered  upon  the  Temple  Mount
The  Rabbis  here  also  lay  down  certain  rules,  of  which  some
are  such  as  a  sense  of  propriety  would  naturally  suggest,
while  others  strangely  remind  us  of  the  words  of  our  Saviour.
Thus  no  one  was  to  come  to  it  except  for  strictly  religious
purposes,  and  neither  to  make  the  Temple  Mount  a  place
of  thoroughfare,  nor  use  it  to  shorten  the  road.  Ordinarily
the  worshippers  were  to  enter  by  the  right  and  to  withdraw

^  This  class  would  include  the  following  four  cases  ;  the  cleansed  leper,  a  person
who  had  had  an  issue,  a  woman  that  had  been  in  her  separation,  and  one  who  had
just  borne  a  child.  Further  explanations  of  each  case  are  given  in  subsequent  chapters.


Temple  Order ^  Revenues ^  and  Music.  41

by  the  left,  avoiding  both  the  direction  and  the  gate  by
which  they  had  come.  But  mourners  and  those  under
ecclesiastical  discipline  were  to  do  the  reverse,  so  as  to  meet
the  stream  of  worshippers,  who  might  address  to  them  either
words  of  sympathy  (*'  He  who  dwelleth  in  this  house  grant
thee  comfort !  "),  or  else  of  admonition  ("  He  who  dwelleth
in  this  house  put  it  into  thy  mind  to  give  heed  to  those
who  would  restore  thee  again ! ").  As  already  stated,  it
was  expressly  prohibited  to  sit  down  in  the  Court  of  the
Priests,  an  exception  being  only  made  in  favour  of  princes  of
the  house  of  David,  probably  to  vindicate  their  consistency,
as  such  instances  were  recorded  in  the  past  history  of  Israel.
Alike  the  ministering  priests  and  the  worshippers  were  to  walk
backwards  when  leaving  the  immediate  neighbourhood  where
the  holy  service  was  performed,  and  at  the  gate  of  Nicanor
each  one  was  to  stand  with  his  head  bent.  It  need  scarcely
be  said  that  reverence  in  gesture  and  deportment  was  enjoined
while  on  the  Temple  Mount.  But  even  when  at  a  distance
from  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple;  its  direction  was  to  be  noted,
so  as  to  avoid  in  every-day  life  anything  that  might  seem
incongruous  with  the  reverence  due  to  the  place  of  which  God
had  said,  "Mine  eyes  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  per-
petually."^ Probably  from  a  similar  feeling  of  reverence,  it
was  ordered,  that  when  once  a  week  the  sanctuary  was
thoroughly  cleaned,  any  repairs  found  needful  should  be  exe-
cuted if  possible  by  priests  or  else  by  Levites,  or  at  least  by
Israelites,  and  only  in  case  of  extreme  necessity  by  work-
men not  levitically  *'  clean."

Other  Rabbinical  ordinances,  however,  are  not   so  easily
explained,  unless  on  the  ground  of  the  avoidance  of  every

*  I  Kings  ix.  3,


42  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

occupation  and  undertaking  other  than  worship.  Thus  "  no
man  might  go  on  the  Temple  Mount  with  his  staff,"  as  if
on  business  or  pleasure  ;  nor  yet  "with  shoes  on  his  feet" —
sandals  only  being  allowed  ;  nor  **  with  the  dust  upon  his
feet;"  nor  *'with  his  scrip/'  nor  "with  money  tied  to  him  in
his  purse."  Whatever  he  might  wish  to  contribute  either  to
the  Temple,  or  for  offerings,  or  for  the  poor  must  be  carried  by
each  "  in  his  hand,"  possibly  to  indicate  that  the  money  about
him  was  exclusively  for  an  immediate  sacred  purpose.  It
was  probably  for  similar  reasons  that  Jesus  transferred  these
very  ordinances  to  the  disciples  when  engaged  in  the  service  of
the  real  Temple.  The  direction,  "Provide  neither  gold,  nor
silver,  nor  brass  in  your  purses,  nor  scrip  for  your  journey,
neither  two  coats,  neither  shoes,  nor  yet  staves,"  must  mean,
Go  out  in  the  same  spirit  and  manner  as  you  would  to  the
Temple  services,  and  fear  not — "  for  the  workman  is  worthy
of  his  meat"^  In  other  words  :  Let  this  new  Temple  service
be  your  only  thought,  undertaking,  and  care.^

But,  guard  it  as  they  might,  it  was  impossible  wholly  to
preserve  the  sanctuary  from  profanation.  For  wilful,  conscious,
high  handed  profanity,  whether  in  reference  to  the  Temple  or
to  God,  the  law  does  not  appear  to  have  provided  any  atone-
ment or  offering.  To  this  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  alludes
in  the  well-known  passage,  so  often  misunderstood,  "  For  if
we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of
the  truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins,  but  a  cer-
tain fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation,
which  shall  devour  the  adversaries."^  In  point  of  fact,  these
terms  of  threatening   correspond    to   two   kinds   of-  Divine

1  Matt,  X.  9,  10.       *  On  the  reverence  due  in  prayer,  see  a  subsequent  chapter.

Heb.  X.  26,  27.


Temple  Order^  Revemces^  aiid  Music.  43

punishment  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament.
The  one,  often  referred  to  in  the  warning  ^'  that  he  die
not,"  is  called  by  the  Rabbis,  ''death  by  the  hand  of  Heaven
or  of  God  ;  '*  the  other  is  that  of  being  *'  cut  off."  It  is
difficult  to  distinguish  exactly  between  these  two.  Tradition
enumerates  thirty-six  offences  to  which  the  punishment  of
''cutting  off"  attaches.  From  their  graver  nature,  as  com-
pared with  the  eleven  offences  on  which  "  death  by  the
hand  of  God"  was  to  follow,  we  gather  that  "  cutting  off"
must  have  been  the  severer  of  the  two  punishments,  and
it  may  correspond  to  the  term  "fiery  indignation."  Some
Rabbis  hold  that  "  death  by  the  hand  of  God  "  was  a
punishment  which  ended  with  this  life,  while  ''  cutting  off"
extended  beyond  it.  But  the  best  authorities  maintain,
that  whereas  death  by  the  hand  of  Heaven  fell  upon  the
guilty  individual  alone,  "  the  cutting  off"  extended  to  the
children  also,  so  that  the  tamily  would  become  extinct  in
Israel.  Such  Divine  punishment  is  alluded  to  in  i  Cor.  xvi.  22y
under  the  well-known  Jewish  expression,  "  Anathema  ]\Iaran-
atha  " — literally,  Anathema  when  the  Lord  cometh  !

To  these  two  Divine  punishments  corresponded  other  two
by  the  hand  of  man— the  "forty  stripes  save  one,"  and  the
so-called  "  rebels'  beating."  The  distinction  between  them
is  easily  explained.  The  former  were  only  inflicted  after  a
regular  judicial  investigation  and  sentence,  and  for  the  breach
of  some  negative  precept  or  prohibition  ;  while  the  latter  was,
so  to  speak,  in  the  hands  of  the  people,  who  might  administer
it  on  the  spot,  and  without  trial,  if  any  one  were  caught
in  supposed  open  defiance  of  some  positive  precept,  whether
of  the  law  of  Moses  or  of  the  traditions  of  the  elders.
The    reader   of  the   New    Testament   will    remember    such


44         The  Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

popular  outbursts,  when  the  men  of  Nazareth  would  have
cast  Jesus  over  the  brow  of  the  hill  on  which  their  city  was
built,^  and  when  on  at  least  two  occasions  the  people  took
up  stones  in  the  Temple  to  stone  Him.  ^  It  is  a  remark-
able fact,  that  when  the  Lord  Jesus  and  when  His  martyr
Stephen  were  before  the  Sanhedrim,^  the  procedure  was  in
each  case  in  direct  contravention  of  all  the  rules  of  the
Rabbinical  criminal  law.  In  each  case  the  sitting  terminated
in  "  the  rebels'  beating/*  both  when  they  "  buffeted  the
Master "  and  "  smote  Him  with  the  palms  of  their  hands,''
and  when  **  they  ran  upon  "  Stephen  "  with  one  accord,  and
cast  him  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned  him."  For  the  rebels'
beating  was  really  unto  death.  The  same  punishment  was
also  to  have  been  inflicted  upon  Paul,  when,  on  the  charge  of
having  brought  a  Gentile  beyond  the  enclosure  in  the  court
open  to  such,  ^*  the  people  ran  together,  and  they  took  Paul,
and  drew  him  out  of  the  Temple,"  and  **  went  about  to  kill
him."  This  summary  mode  of  punishing  supposed  "rebellion  "
was  probably  vindicated  by  the  example  of  Phinehas,  the  son
of  Eleazar.*  On  the  other  hand,  the  mildness  of  the  Rab-
binical law,  where  religious  feelings  were  not  involved,  led  to
modifications  of  the  punishment  prescribed  in  Deut.  xxv.  2,  3.
Thus  because  the  words  were,  "  by  a  certain  number,  forty
stripes  he  may  give  him,"  instead  of  a  simple  direction  to
give  the  forty  stripes,  the  law  was  construed  as  meaning  a
number  near  to  forty,  or  thirty-nine,  which  accordingly  was
the  severest  corporeal  punishment  awarded  at  one  time.
If  the  number  of  stripes  were  less  than  thirty-nine,  it
must  still  be  some  multiple  of  three,  since,  as  the  scourge

1  Luke  iv.  29.  2  John  viii.  59  ;  x.  31.

»  Matt.  xxvi.  59,  68;  Acts  vii.  57,  58.  *  Numb.  xxv.  7,  8,


Temple  Order,  Revenues,  and  Music.  45

was  composed  of  three  separate  thongs  (the  middle  one  of
cah's  leather,  the  other  two  of  asses',  with  a  reference  to
Isaiah  i.  3),  each  stroke  of  the  scourge  in  reality  inflicted  three
stripes.  Hence  the  greatest  number  of  strokes  administered
at  one  time  amounted  only  to  thirteen.  The  law  also  most
particularly  defined  and  modified  every  detail,  even  to  the
posture  of  the  criminal.  Still  this  punishment,  which  St.  Paul
underwent  not  less  than  five  times  at  the  hands  of  the  Jews,^
must  have  been  very  severe.  In  general,  we  can  only  hope
that  it  was  not  so  often  administered  as  Rabbinical  writings
seem  to  imply.  During  the  scourging,  Deut.  xxviii.  58,  59,
and  at  its  close  Psa.  Ixxviii.  38,  were  read  to  the  culprit.
After  the  punishment  he  was  not  to  be  reproached,  but
received  as  a  brother.^

That  strict  discipline  both  in  regard  to  priests  and  wor-
shippers would,  however,  be  necessary,  may  be  inferred  even
from  the  immense  number  of  worshippers  which  thronged
Jerusalem  and  the  Temple.  According  to  a  late  computation,
the  Temple  could  have  held  "  within  its  colossal  girdle  "  '*  two
amphitheatres  of  the  size  of  the  Coliseum.**  As  the  latter  is
reckoned  to  have  been  capable,  inclusive  of  its  arena  and
passages,  of  accommodating  109,000  persons,  the  calculation
that  the  Temple  might  contain  at  one  time  about  210,000
persons  seems  by  no  means  exaggerated.^     It  will  readily  be

i  2  Cor.  xi.  24.

2  Further  details  belong  to  the  criminal  jurisprudence  of  the  Sanhedrim.

^  ^^^  Edinburgh  J^eview  for  J SLnum-jf  1873,  p.  18.  We  may  here  msert  another
architectural  comparison  from  the  same  interesting  article,  which,  however,  is
unfortunately  defaced  by  many  and  serious  mistakes  on  other  points.  **  The
length  of  the  eastern  wall  of  the  sanctuary,"  writes  the  reviewer,  **was  more
than  double  that  of  the  side  of  the  Great  Pyramid  ;  its  height  nearly  one-third  of
the  Egyptian  structure  from  the  foundation.  If  to  this  great  height  of  152  feet
of  solid  wall  you  add  the  descent  of  114  feet  to  the  bed  of  the  Kedron,  and  the


46         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  a?td  Services.

believed  what  immense  wealth  this  multitude  must  have
brought  to  the  great  national  sanctuary.

Indeed,  the  Temple  treasury  had  always  been  an  object
of  cupidity  to  foreigners.  It  was  successively  plundered  by
Syrians  and  Romans/  though  at  the  last  siege  the  flames
deprived  Titus  and  his  soldiers  of  this  booty.  Even  so  liberal
and  enlightened  a  statesman  as  Cicero  inveighed,  perhaps  on
the  ground  of  exaggerated  reports,  against  the  enormous
influx  of  gold  from  all  lands  to  Jerusalem.  From  biblical
history  we  know  how  liberal  were  the  voluntary  contribu-
tions at  the  time  of  Moses,  of  David,  and  again  of  Joash^  and
of  Josiah.^  Such  offerings  to  the  Temple  treasury  continued
to  the  last  a  very  large  source  of  revenue.  They  might  be
brought  either  in  the  form  of  vows  or  of  free  gifts.  Any
object,  or  even  a  person,  might  be  dedicated  by  vow  to  the
altar.  If  the  thing  vowed  were  suitable,  it  would  be  used  ;  if
otherwise,  sold,  and  its  value  given  to  the  treasury.  Readers
of  the  New  Testament  know  how  fatally  such  spurious
liberality  interfered  with  the  most  sacred  duties  of  life.^  From
Jewish  tradition  we  gather  that  there  must  have  been
quite  a  race  for  distinction  in  this  respect.  The  wood,  the
incense,  the  wine,  the  oil,  and  all  other  things  requisite  for  the
sacred  services,  as  well  as  golden  and  silver  vessels,  were
contributed  with  lavish  hand.  Certain  families  obtained  by
their  zeal  special  privileges,  such  as  that  the  wood  they  brought
should  always  be  first  used  for  the  altar  fire  ;  and  the  case
of  people  leaving  the  whole  of  their  fortune  to  the  Temple  is

further  elevation  of  160  feet  attained  by  the  pinnacle,  we  have  a  total  of  426
feet,  which  is  only  59  feet  less  than  the  Great  Pyramid."

^  The  history  of  the  Temple  treasury  would  form  an  interesting  subject,  on
which  for  the  present  we  cannot  enter.

«  2  ChroHo  xxiv.  ^  2  Kings  xxii.  *  Matt,  xv.  5,


i'emple  Order ^  Revenues^  and  Music.  47

so  often  discussed,^  that  it  must  have  been  a  by  no  means
uncommon  occurrence.  To  this  practice  Christ  may  have
referred  in  denouncing  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  who  "devour
widows'  houses,  and  for  a  pretence  make  long  prayers."^
For  a  good  deal  of  this  money  went  in  the  end  from  the
Temple  treasury  to  them,  although  there  is  no  evidence  of
their' intriguing  for  personal  gifts.  Besides  these  votive  offer-
ings, and  the  sale  of  the  surplusage  of  incense,  flour,  etc.,  the
people  were  wont  on  the  Sabbaths  and  feast-days  to  bring
voluntary  contributions  *Mn  their  hand"  to  the  Temple.^
Another  and  very  large  source  of  revenue  was  from  the
profit  made  by  the  meat-offerings,  which  were  prepared  by
the  Levites,  and  sold  every  day  to  the  offerers.  But  by
far  the  largest  sum  was  derived  from  the  half-shekel  of  Temple  \
tribute,  which  was  incumbent  on  every  male  Israelite  of  a^e,  ^
including  proselytes  and  even  manumitted  slaves.  As  the
shekel  of  the  sanctuary  was  double  the  ordinary,  the  half-
shekel  due  to  the  Temple  treasury  amounted  to  about  is.  4d.
(two  denarii  or  a  did^^achmd).  Hence,  when  Christ  was
challenged  at  Capernaum*  for  this  payment,  He  directed
Peter  to  give  the  stater^  or  two  didrachmas,  for  them  both.
This  circumstance  also  enables  us  to  fix  the  exact  date
of  this  event.  For  annually,  on  the  1st  of  Adar  (the
month  before  the  Passover),  proclamation  was  made  through-
out the  country  by  messengers  sent  from  Jerusalem  of  the

1  Shek.  iv.

2  Matt,  xxiii.  14.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  not  a  few  passages  in  the
Mishnah  inveighing  against  vows,  and  showing  how  absolution  from  them  may  be
obtained.  A  full  treatment  of  the  subject  belongs  to  Jewish  antiquities  and
Rabbinical  jurisprudence.

3  The  subject  of  *' Vows  "  will  be  again  and  more  fully  treated  in  a  subsequent
chapter,  *  Matt.  xvii.  24.


48  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

approaching  Temple  tribute.  On  the  15th  of  Adar  the
money-changers  opened  stalls  throughout  the  country  to
change  the  various  coins,  which  Jewish  residents  at  home  or
settlers  abroad  might  bring,  into  the  ancient  money  of  Israel.
For  custom  had  it  that  nothing  but  the  regular  half-shekel  of
the  sanctuary  could  be  received  at  the  treasury.  On  the  25th
of  Adar  business  was  only  transacted  within  the  precincts  of
Jerusalem  and  of  the  Temple,  and  after  that  date  those  who
had  refused  to  pay  the  impost  could  be  proceeded  against  at
law,  and  their  goods  distrained,^  the  only  exception  being  in
favour  of  priests,  and  that  "  for  the  sake  of  peace,"  that  is,  lest
their  office  should  come  in  disrepute.  From  heathens  or
Samaritans  no  tribute  money  was  to  be  received,  the  general
rule  in  reference  to  all  their  offerings  being  this :  *'  A  votive
and  a  free-will  offering  they  receive  at  their  hands  ;  but  what-
ever is  not  either  a  votive  or  a  free-will  offering  (does  not  come
under  either  category)  is  not  received  at  their  hands."  In
support,  Ezra  iv.  3  was  quoted.^  The  law  also  fixed  the  rate
of  discount  which  the  money-changers  were  allowed  to  charge
those  who  procured  from  them  the  Temple  coin,  perhaps  to
obviate  suspicion  of,  or  temptation  to  usury — a  sin  regarded
as  one  of  the  most  heinous  civil  offences.  The  total  sum
derived  annually  from  the  Temple  tribute  has  been  computed
at  about  ;£"76,ooo.^  As  the  bankers  were  allowed  to  charge  a
silver  meah,  or  about  one-fourth  of  a  denar*  (2d.)  on  every
half-shekel,  their  profits  must  have  amounted  to  nearly
;^9,5oo,  or,  deducting  a  small  sum  for  exceptional  cases,  in

»  Shek.  i.  3.  2  shek.  i.  5.  3  gee  Winer,  ReaUWbrterb.  ii.  589.

*  Ersch's  Encycl.  (Art.  Juden,  p.  31)  computes  it  at  one-fifth;  Zunz  {Zur
Gesch,  u.  Litt,y  p.  539)  at  one- third  of  a  denar.  We  have  adopted  the  view  of
Winer,


Temple  Order,  Revenues,  and  Music.  49

which  the  meah  was  not  to  be  charged/  say  about  ^9,000 —
a  very  large  sum,  considering  the  value  of  money  in  a
country  where  a  labourer  received  a  denar  (8d.)  for  a  day's
work,2  and  the  ^*  good  Samaritan "  left  only  two  denars
(is.  4d.)  in  the  inn  for  the  keep  of  the  sick  man.^  It  must
therefore  have  been  a  very  powerful  interest  which  Jesus
attacked,  when  in  the  Court  of  the  Temple  He  ''  poured  out
the  changers*  money,  and  overthrew  the  tables,"*  while  at
the  same  time  He  placed  Himself  in  direct  antagonism  to  the
sanctioned  arrangements  of  the  Sanhedrim,  whom  He  virtually
charged  with  profanity.

It  had  only  been  about  a  century  before,  during  the  reign  of
Salome-Alexandra  (about  "jZ  B.C.),  that  the  Pharisaical  party,
being  then  in  power,  had  carried  an  enactment  by  which  the
Temple  tribute  was  to  be  enforced  at  law.  It  need  scarcely
be  said  that  for  this  there  was  not  the  slightest  Scriptural
warrant.  Indeed,  the  Old  Testament  nowhere  provided  legal
means  for  enforcing  any  payment  for  religious  purposes.
The  law  stated  what  was  due,  but  left  its  observance  to
the  piety  of  the  people,  so  that  alike  the  provision  for  the
Temple  and  for  the  priesthood  must  have  varied  with  the
religious  state  of  the  nation.^  But,  irrespective  of  this,  it  is
matter  of  doubt  whether  the  half-shekel  had  ever  been  in-
tended as  an  annual  payment.^  Its  first  enactment  was  under
exceptional  circumstances,^  and  the  mode  in  which,  as  we  are
informed,  a  similar  collection  was  made  during  the  reign  of
Joash,  suggests  the  question  whether  the  original  institution  by

1  These  are  mentioned  in  Shek.  i.  7.     Our  deduction  is  very  liberal.
*  Matt.  XX.  2.  3  Luke.  x.  35.  ^  John  ii.  15.  ^  Mai.  iii.  8-10.

®  See  Michaelis,  Mas.  Recki^  vol.  iii.   pp.  150,  etc,  and  Saalschiitz,  Das  Mos,
Recht^  p.  292.  "^  Ex.  XXX.  12.


50         The   Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Moses  was  not  treated  rather  as  affording  a  precedent  than  as
laying  down  a  binding  rule.^  At  the  time  of  Nehemiah^  we
read  only  of  a  self-imposed  "  ordinance,"  and  at  the  rate  of
a  third,  not  a  half-shekel.  But  long  before  the  coming  of
Christ  very  different  views  prevailed.  *^  The  dispersed  abroad  "
regarded  the  Temple  as  the  one  bond  of  their  national  as  well
as  their  religious  life.  Patriotism  and  religion  swelled  their
gifts,  which  far  exceeded  the  legal  dues.  Gradually  they  came
to  regard  the  Temple  tribute  as,  in  the  literal  sense  of  the
words,  "a  ransom  for  their  souls." ^  So  many  were  the  givers
and  so  large  their  gifts  that  they  were  always  first  brought  to
certain  central  places,  whence  the  most  honourable  of  their
number  carried  them  as  "sacred  ambassadors  "  to  Jerusalem,
The  richest  contributions  came  from  those  crowded  Jewish
settlements  in  Mesopotamia  and  Babylon,  to  which  "the  dis-
persed "  had  originally  been  transported.  Here  special  trea-
suries for  their  reception  had  been  built  in  the  cities  of  Nisibis
and  Nehardea,  whence  a  large  armed  escort  annually  accompa-
nied the  "  ambassadors  *^  to  Palestine.  Similarly,  Asia  Minor,
which  at  one  time  contributed  nearly  ;£'8,ooo  a  year,  had  its
central  collecting  places.  In  the  Temple  these  moneys  were
emptied  into  three  large  chests,  which  were  opened  with
certain  formalities  at  each  of  the  three  great  feasts.  Accord-
ing to  tradition  these  three  chests  held  three  seahs  each  (the
seah  =5  I  peck  i  pint),  so  that  on  the  three  occasions  of  their
opening  twenty-seven  seahs  of  coin  were  taken.

The  Temple  revenues  were  in  the  first  place  devoted  to

the  purchase  of  all  public  sacrifices,  that  is,  those  offered  in  the

name  of  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel,  such  as  the  morning

and  evening  sacrifices,  the  festive  sacrifices,  etc.     This  pay-

1  2  Chron.  xxiv.  6-1 1.  ^  Neh.  x,  32-34*  3  £x.  xxx.  12.


Temple  Order,  Revemies,  and  Music.  51

ment  had  been  one  of  the  points  in  controversy  between  the
Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees.  So  great  importance  was
attached  to  it,  that  all  Israel  should  appear  represented  in
the  purchase  of  the  public  sacrifices,  that  when  the  three
chests  were  emptied  they  took  expressly  from  one  "  for  the
land  of  Israel/'  from  another  "  for  the  neighbouring  lands  '*
(that  is,  for  the  Jews  there  resident),  and  from  the  third  ''  for
distant  lands."  Besides,  the  Temple  treasury  defrayed  all
else  necessary  for  the  services  of  the  sanctuary ;  all  Temple
repairs,  and  the  salaries  of  a  large  staff  of  regular  officials,
such  as  those  who  prepared  the  shew-bread  and  the  incense  ;
who  saw  to  the  correctness  of  the  copies  of  the  law  used
in  the  synagogues  ;  who  examined  into  the  levitical  fitness
of  sacrifices;  who  instructed  the  priests  in  their  various  duties  ;^
who  made  the  curtains,  etc., — not  omitting,  according  to  their
own  testimony,  the  fees  of  the  Rabbis.  And  after  all  this
lavish  expenditure  there  was  not  only  enough  to  pay  for  the
repairs  of  the  city-walls,  the  roads,  and  public  buildings,  etc.,
about  Jerusalem,  but  sufficient  to  accumulate  immense  wealth
in  the  treasury !

To  the  wealth  and  splendour  of  the  Temple  corresponded
the  character  of  its  services.  The  most  important  of  these,
next  to  the  sacrificial  rites,  was  the  hymnody  of  the
sanctuary.  We  can  conceive  what  it  must  have  been  in  the
days  of  David  and  of  Solomon.  But  even  in  New  Testament
times  it  was  such  that  St.  John  could  find  no  more  adequate
imagery  to  portray  heavenly  realities  and  the  final  triumph
of  the  Church  than  that  taken  from  the  service  of  praise  in
the  Temple.  Thus,  when  first  *'  the  twenty-four  elders,"  repre-
senting the  chiefs  of  the  twenty-four  courses  of  the  priest-

1  Ketuv,  cvi.  I.


52  The   Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

hood,  and  afterwards  the  144,000,  representing  redeemed  Israel
in  its  fulness  (12  x  12,000),  sing  '^  the  new  song" — the  former
in  heaven,  the  latter  on  Mount  Zion — they  appear,  just  as  in
the  Temple  services,  as  "harpers,  harping  with  their  harps." ^
Possibly  there  may  also  be  an  analogy  between  the  ti-me
when  these  "  harpers  "  are  introduced  and  the  period  in  the
Temple-service  when  the  music  began — ^just  as  the  joyous;
drink-ofifering  was  poured  out.  There  is  yet  a  third  reference
in  the  Book  of  Revelation  to  ''the  harps  of  God,"^  with  most
pointed  allusion,  not  to  the  ordinary,  but  to  the  Sabbath
services  in  the  Temple.  In  this  case  "the  harpers"  are
all  they  "  that  had  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast."  The
church,  which  has  come  out  of  great  tribulation,  stands  vic-
torious "  on  the  sea  of  glass  ; "  and  the  saints,  "  having  the
harps  of  God,"  sing  "  the  song  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God."
It  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  church ;  and  as  on  the  Sabbath,
besides  the  psalm  for  the  day^  at  the  ordinary  sacrifice,  they
sung  at  the  additional  Sabbatic  sacrifice,*  in  the  morning,  the
Song  of  Moses,  in  Deut.  xxxii.,  and  in  the  evening  that  in
Ex.  XV.,  so  the  victorious  church  celebrates  her  true  sabbath
of  rest  by  singing  this  same  "  Song  of  Moses  and  of  the  Lamb,"
only  in  language  that  expresses  the  fullest  meaning  of  the
Sabbath  songs  in  the  Temple.

Properly  speaking,  the  real  service  of  praise  in  the  Temple
was  only  with  the  voice.  This  is  often  laid  down  as  a  prin-
ciple by  the  Rabbis.  What  instrumental  music  there  was,
served  only  to  accompany  and  sustain  the  song.  Accord-
ingly, none  other  than  Levites  might  act  as  choristers,  while
other  distinguished  Israelites  were  allowed  to  take  part  in  the

*  Rev.  V.  8 ;  xiv.  2,  3.  ^  R^y^  xv.  2.  '     Psa.  xcii.

*  Numb,  xxviii.  9,  10.


Temple  Order,  Revemies,  and  Mtcsic.  53

instrumental  music.  The  blasts  of  the  trumpets,  blown  by
priests  only,  formed — at  least  in  the  second  Temple — no  part
of  the  instrumental  music  of  the  service,  but  were  intended
for  quite  different  purposes.  Even  the  posture  of  the  per-
formers showed  this,  for  while  the  Levites  stood  at  their  desks
facing  towards  the  sanctuary,  or  westwards,  the  priests,  with
their  silver  trumpets,  stood  exactly  in  the  opposite  direction,
on  the  west  side  of  the  rise  of  the  altar,  by  the  ''  table  of  the
fat,"  and  looking  eastwards  or  down  the  courts.  On  ordinary
days  the  priests  blew  seven  times,  each  time  three  blasts — a
short  sound,  an  alarm,  and  again  a  sharp  short  sound  (Thekiah,
Theruah,  and  Thekiah),^  or,  as  the  Rabbis  express  it,  ''An
alarm  in  the  midst  and  a  plain  note  before  and  after  it.'*
According  to  tradition,  they  were  intended  symibolically  to
proclaim  the  kingdom  of  God,  Divine  Providence,  and  the  final
judgment.  The  first  three  blasts  were  blown  when  the  great
gates  of  the  Temple — especially  that  of  Nicanor — were  opened.
Then,  when  the  drink-offering  was  poured  out,  the  Levites
sung  the  psalm  of  the  day  in  three  sections.  After  each  sec-
tion there  was  a  pause,  when  the  priests  blew  three  blasts,  and
the  people  w^orshipped.  This  was  the  practice  at  the  evening,
as  at  the  morning  sacrifice.  On  the  eve  of  the  Sabbath  a
threefold  blast  of  the  priests'  trumpets  summoned  the  people,

1  Inferring  from  the  present  usage  in  the  Synagogue,  Saalschiitz  {Gesch.  d.  Musik
bei  d,  Hebr.)  has  thus  marked  them  —


The  Thekiah :         /k   (*         !S~5"


and  the  Theruah  j


\j  ^    -^    -0-    S'    -m-


54  ^riie  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Sej^vices.

far  as  the  sound  was  carried  over  the  city,  to  prepare  for
the  holy  day,  while  another  threefold  blast  announced  its
actual  commencement.  On  Sabbaths,  when,  besides  the  ordi-
nary, an  additional  sacrifice  was  brought,  and  the  "  Song
of  Moses  "  sung — not  the  whole  every  Sabbath,  but  divided
in  six  parts,  one  for  every  Sabbath, — the  priests  sounded
their  trumpets  additional  three  times  in  the  pauses  of  the
Sabbath  psalm.  ^

The  music  of  the  Temple  owed  its  origin  to  David,  who  was
not  only  a  poet  and  a  musical  composer,  but  who  also  invented
musical  instruments,^  especially  the  ten-stringed  Nevel  or  lute.^
From  the  Book  of  Chronicles  we  know  how  fully  this  part  of
the  service  was  cultivated,  although  the  statement  of  Josephus,^
that  Solomon  had  provided  forty  thousand  harps  and  lutes,
and  two  hundred  thousand  silver  trumpets,  is  evidently  a  gross
exaggeration.  The  Rabbis  enumerate  thirty-six  different
instruments,  of  which  only  fifteen  are  mentioned  in  the  Bible,
and  of  these  five  in  the  Pentateuch.  As  in  early  Jewish  poetry
there  was  neither  definite  and  continued  metre  (in  the  modern
sense),  nor  regular  and  premeditated  rhyme,  so  there  was
neither  musical  notation,  nor  yet  any  artificial  harmony.  The
melody  was  simple,  sweet,  and  sung  in  unison  to  the  accom-
paniment of  instrumental  music.  Only  one  pair  of  brass
cymbals  were  allowed  to  be  used.^  But  this  **  sounding  brass"
and  '*  tinkling  cymbal ''  formed  no  part  of  the  Temple  music
itself,  and  served  only  as  the  signal  to  begin  that  part  of  the

1  All  these  regulations  are  stated  in  Mishnah,  Succah,  v.  5,  Further  details
about  Temple  hymns  and  Temple  music  are  given  in  the  description  of  the  daily
service  and  in  that  of  the  Sabbath  and  the  various  feast-days.

2  Amosvi.  5  ;  I  Chron.  xxiii.  5.     ^  Psa.  xxxiii.  2  ;  cxiiv.  9.     *  Ant.  viii.  3,  8.

^  For  particulars  on  all  points  connected  with  Jewish  art,  poetry,  and  science,  I
must  refer  to  my  History  of  the  yezvish  Nation.


Temple  Order,  RevenueSy  and  Music.  55

service.  To  this  the  apostle  seems  to  refer  when,  in  i  Cor.
xiii.  I,  he  compares  the  gift  of  "tongues"  to  the  sign  or
signal  by  which  the  real  music  of  the  Temple  was  introduced.
That  music  was  chiefly  sustained  by  the  harp  (Kinnor)  and
the  lute  (Nevel).  Of  the  latter  (which  was  probably  used
for  solos)  not  less  than  two  nor  more  than  six  were  to  be  in
the  Temple  orchestra  ;  of  the  former,  or  harp,  as  many  as
possible,  but  never  less  than  nine.  There  were,  of  course,
several  varieties  both  of  the  Nevel  and  the  Kinnor.  The
chief  difference  between  these  two  kinds  of  stringed  instru-
ments lay  in  this,  that  in  the  Nevel  (lute  or  guitar)  the  strings
were  drawn  over  the  sounding-board,  while  in  the  Kinnor
they  stood  out  free,  as  in  our  harps.^  Of  wind-instruments
we  know  that,  besides  their  silver  trumpets,  the  priests  also
blew  the  Shophar  or  horn,  notably  at  the  new  moon,  on  the
Feast  of  the  New  Year,^  and  to  proclaim  the  Year  of  Jubilee,^
which,  indeed,  thence  derived  its  name.  Originally  the  Sho-
phar was  probably  a  ram's  horn,^  but  afterwards  it  was  also
made  of  metal.  The  Shophar  was  chiefly  used  for  its  loud
and  far-sounding  tones.^  At  the  Feast  of  the  New  Year,  one
priest  with  a  Shophar  was  placed  between  those  who  blew
the  trumpets  ;  while  on  fast  days  a  priest  with  a  Shophar
stood  on  each  side  of  them— the  tones  of  the  Shophar  being
prolonged  beyond  those  of  the  trumpets.  In  the  synagogues
out  of  Jerusalem  the  Shophar  alone  was  blown  at  the  New
Year,  and. on  fast-days  only  trumpets.

The  flute  (or  reed  pipe)  was  played  in  the  Temple  on  twelve

1  The  opposite  is  the  generally  received  opinion.     But  see  the  article  **  Music,"
by  Leyrer,  in  Herzog's  Encycl.

2  Psa.  Ixxxi.  3.  ^  Lev.  xxv.  9.  *  Jos.,  Ant,  v.  5,  6.
*  Ex.  xix.  16,  19 ;  XX.  18;  Isa.  Iviii.  I.


56  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

special  festivities.^  These  were  :  the  day  of  killing  the  first,  and
that  of  killing  the  second  Passover,  the  first  day  of  unleavened
bread,  Pentecost,  and  the  eiglit  days  of  the  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles. Quite  in  accordance  with  the  social  character  of  these
feasts,  the  flute  was  also  used  by  the  festive  pilgrim-bands  on
their  journey  to  Jerusalem,  to  accompany  '^  the  Psalms  of
Degrees,"  or  rather  of  "  Ascent,"  ^  sung  on  such  occasions.
It  was  also  customary  to  play  it  at  marriage  feasts  and  at
funerals ;  ^  for  according  to  Rabbinical  law  every  Jew  was
bound  to  provide  at  least  two  flutes  and  one  mourning  woman
at  the  funeral  of  his  wife.  In  the  Temple,  not  less  than  two
nor  more  than  twelve  flutes  were  allowed,  and  the  melody  was
on  such  occasions  to  close  with  the  notes  of  one  flute  alone.
Lastly,  we  have  sufficient  evidence  that  there  was  a  kind  of
organ  used  in  the  Temple  (the  Magrephah),  but  whether  merely
for  giving  signals  or  not,  cannot  be  clearly  determined.

As  already  stated,  the  service  of  praise  was  mainly  sustained
by  the  human  voice.  A  good  voice  was  the  one  qualification
needful  for  a  Levite.  In  the  second  Temple  female  singers
seem  at  one  time  to  have  been  employed.*  In  the  Temple  of
Herod  their  place  was  supplied  by  Levite  boys.  Nor  did  the
worshippers  any  more  take  part  in  the  praise,  except  by  a
responsive  Amen.  It  was  otherwise  in  the  first  Temple,  as  we
gather  from  i  Chron.  xvi.  36,  from  the  allusion  in  Jer.  xxxiii.
II,  and  also  from  such  Psalms  as  xxvi.  12  ;  Ixviii.  26.  At  the
laying  of  the  foundation  of  the  second  Temple,  and  at  the
dedication  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  the  singing  seems  to  have

*  The  flute  was  used  in  Alexandria  to  accompany  the  hymns  at  the  love  feasts
of  the  early  Christians,  up  to  the  year  190,  when  Clement  of  Alexandria  introduced
the  harp  in  its  place.     See  Leyrer  u.  s,

2  Isa.  XXX   29.  3  Matt.  ix.  23.  *  Ezra  ii.  65 ;  Neh.  vii.  67.


Temple  Order ^  Revenues^  and  Mtcsic.  57

been  antiphonal,  or  in  responses/  the  two  choirs  afterwards
apparently  combining,  and  singing  in  unison  in  the  Temple
itself.  Something  of  the  same  kind  was  probably  also  the
practice  in  the  first  Temple.  What  the  melodies  were  to
which  the  Psalms  had  been  sung,  it  is,  unfortunately,  now
impossible  to  ascertain.  Some  of  the  music  still  used  in  the
synagogue  must  date  from  those  times,  and  there  is  no  rea-
son to  doubt  that  in  the  so-called  Gregorian  tones  we  have
also  preserved  to  us  a  close  approximation  to  the  ancient
hymnody  of  the  Temple,  though  certainly  not  without  con-
siderable alterations.

But  how  solemn  must  have  been  the  scene  when,  at  the  dedi-
cation of  Solomon's  Temple  during  the  service  of  praise,  "  the
hpuse  was  filled  with  a  cloud,  even  the  house  of  Jehovah  ;  so
that  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister  by  reason  of  the
cloud  :  for  the  glory  of  Jehovah  had  filled  the  house  of  God  T'^
Such  music,  and  such  responsive  singing,  might  well  serve,  in
the  Book  of  Revelation,  as  imagery  of  heavenly  realities,^
especially  in  that  description  of  the  final  act  of  worship  in
Rev.  xiv.  i~5,  where  at  the  close  of  their  antiphony  the  two
choirs  combine,  as  at  the  dedication  of  the  second  Temple,  to
join  in  this  grand  unison,  '*  Alleluia  :  for  the  Lord  God  omni-
potent reigneth."^

^  Ezra  iii.  lo,  ii  ;  Neh.  xiL  27,  40.  •  2  Chron.  v.  13,  I4.

^  Rev.  iv.  8,  II  ;  V.  9,  12;  viL  10-12,
*  Rev.  xix,  6,  7 ;  comp.  also  Rev.  v.  13,


CHAPTER  IV.

THE  OFFICIATING  PRIESTHOOD.

**And  every  priest  standeth  daily  ministering  and  offering  oftentimes  the  same
sacrifices,  which  can  never  take  away  sins/' — Heb.  x.  ii.

AMONG  the  most  interesting  glimpses  of  early  life  in  the
church  is  that  afforded  by  a  small  piece  of  rapidly-
drawn  scenery  which  presents  to  our  view  "a  great  company
of  the  priests,"  "obedient  to  the  faith." ^  We  seem  to  be
carried  back  in  imagination  to  the  time  when  Levi  remained
faithful  amidst  the  general  spiritual  defection,^  and  then
through  the  long  vista  of  devout  ministering  priests  to  reach
the  fulfilment  of  this  saying  of  Malachi — part  admonition,
and  part  prophecy :  "  For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  know;-
ledge,  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth  :  for  he  is
the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  hosts."  ^  We  can  picture  to
ourselves  how  they  who  ministered  in  holy  things  would  at
eventide,  when  the  Temple  was  deserted  of  its  worshippers,
gather  to  speak  of  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  services,
and  to  consider  the  wonderful  things  which  had  taken  place
in  Jerusalem,  as  some  alleged,  in  fulfilment  of  those  very

*  Acts  vi.  7.  *  Ex.  xxxii.  26.  *  Malachi  ii.  7,


The  Officiating  Priesthood.  59

types  that  formed  the  essence  of  their  office  and  ministry.
"For  this  thing  was  not  done  in  a  corner.'*  The  trial  of
Jesus,  His  condemnation  by  the  Sanhedrim,  and  His  being
delivered  up  to  the  Gentiles,  must  have  formed  the  theme
of  frequent  and  anxious  discussion  in  the  Temple.  Were
not  their  own  chief  priests  implicated  in  the  matter }  Did
not  Judas  on  that  fatal  day  rush  into  the  Temple,  and  wildly
cast  the  *'  price  of  blood  '*  into  the  "  treasury  ? "  On  the  other
hand,  was  not  one  of  the  principal  priests  and  a  member  of
the  priestly  council,  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  an  adherent  of
Christ }  Did  not  the  Sanhedrist  Nicodemus  adopt  the  same
views,  and  even  Gamaliel  advise  caution  "i  Besides,  in  the
"porches"  of  the  Temple,  especially  in  that  of  Solomon,
"a  notable  miracle'*  had  been  done  in  "that  Name,"  and
there  also  its  all-prevailing  power  was  daily  proclaimed.  It
specially  behoved  the  priesthood  to  inquire  well  into  the
matter ;  and  the  Temple  seemed  the  most  appropriate  place
for  its  discussion.

The  number  of  priests  to^be  found  at  all  times  in  Jerusalem
must  have  been  very  great,  and  Ophel  a  densely  inhabited
quarter.  According  to  Jewish  tradition,  half  of  each  of  the
twenty- four  "courses,"  into  which  the  priesthood  were  divided,
were  permanently  resident  in  Jerusalem ;  the  rest  scattered
over  the  land.  It  is  added,  that  about  one  half  of  the  latter
had  settled  in  Jericho,  and  were  in  the  habit  of  supplying
the  needful  support  to  their  brethren  while  officiating  in
Jerusalem.  Of  course  such  statements  must  not  be  taken
literally,  though  no  doubt  they  are  substantially  correct.
When  a  "  course  "  was  on  duty,  all  its  members  were  bound
to  appear  in  the  Temple.  Those  who  stayed  away,  with
such  "  representatives  of  the  people  "  (or  "  stationary  men  '*)


6o         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

as,  like  them,  had  been  prevented  from  "going  up"  to
Jerusalem  in  their  turn,  had  to  meet  in  the  synagogues
of  their  district  to  pray  and  to  fast  each  day  of  their
week  of  service,  except  on  the  sixth,  the  seventh,  and
the  first — that  is,  neither  on  the  Sabbath,  nor  on  the  days
preceding  and  succeeding  it,  as  the  "joy"  attaching  to
the  Sabbath  rendered  a  fast  immediately  before  or  after  it
inappropriate.

It  need  scarcely  be  said,  that  everything  connected  with
the   priesthood   was   intended  to  be  symbolical  and  typical
— the  office  itself,  its  functions,  even  its  dress  and  outward
support.     The  fundamental  design  of  Israel  itself  was  to  be
unto  Jehovah  "a  kingdom  of  priests  and  an  holy  nation."^
This,   however,   could   only   be   realised   in  "the   fulness   of
time."     At  the  very  outset  there  was  the  barrier  of  sin  ;  and
in  order  to  gain  admittance  to  the  ranks  of  Israel,  when  "  the
sum  of  the  children  of  Israel  was  taken  after  their  number,"
every  man  had  to  give  the  half-shekel,  which  in  after  times
became   the   regular    Temple    contribution,    as    "a    ransom
(covering)  for  his  soul  unto  Jehovah."^     But  even  so  Israel
was   sinful,   and   could   only   approach  Jehovah  in  the  way
which   Himself  opened,  and  in   the  manner  which    He   ap-
pointed.    Direct  choice  and  appointment  by  God  were  the
conditions   alike  of  the  priesthood,  of  sacrifices,  feasts,  and
of  every  detail  of  service.      The   fundamental   ideas   which
underlay  all  and  connected  it  into  a  harmonious  whole,  were
reconciliaiion  and  mediation :  the  one  expressed  by  typically
atoning  sacrifices,  the  other  by  a  typically  intervening  priest-
hood.    Even  the  Hebrew  term  for  priest  {Cohen)  denotes  in
its   root-meaning   "  one  who    stands    up    for    another,   and

*  Ex.  xix.  5,  6.  *  Ex.  XXX.  12,  13.


The  Officiati7ig  Priesthood.  6 1

mediates  in  his  cause."  ^  For  this  purpose  God  chose  the
tribe  of  Leviy  and  out  of  it  again  the  family  of  Aaro7ty  on
whom  He  bestowed  the  "priest^s  office  as  a  gift."^  But
the  whole  characteristics  and  the  functions  of  the  priesthood
centred  in  the  persoii  of  the  high-priest.  In  accordance  with
their  Divine  "calling"^  was  the  special  and  exceptional  pro-
vision made  for  the  support  of  the  priesthood.  Its  principle
was  thus  expressed :  "  I  am  thy  part  and  thine  inheritance
among  the  children  of  Israel ;  '*  and  its  joyousness,  when
realised  in  its  full  meaning  and  application,  found  vent  in
such  words  as  Psa.  xvi.  5,  6:  "Jehovah  is  the  portion  of
mine  inheritance  and  of  my  cup  :  Thou  maintainest  my  lot.
The  lines  are  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant  places ;  yea,  I  have
a  goodly  heritage."

But  there  was  yet  another  idea  to  be  expressed  by  the
priesthood.  The  object  of  reconciliation  was  holiness,  Israel
was  to  be  "  a  holy  nation  " — reconciled  through  the  '^  sprink-
ling of  blood ; "  brought  near  to,  and  kept  in  fellowship  with
God  by  that  means.  The  priesthood,  as  the  representative
offerers  of  that  blood  and  mediators  of  the  people,  were  also  to
show  forth  the  "  holiness "  of  Israel.  Everyone  knows  how
this  was  symbolised  by  the  gold-plate  which  the  high-priest
wore  on^his  forehead,  and  which  bore  the  words  :  ''  Holiness
unto  Jehovah."  But  though  the  high-priest  in  this,  as  in
every  other  respect,  was  the  fullest  embodiment  of  the  func-
tions and  the  object  of  the  priesthood,  the  same  truth  was

^  This  root-meaning  (through  the  Arabic)  of  the  Hebrew  word  for  priest,  as
one  intervening,  explains  its  occasional  though  very  rare  application  to  others  than
priests,  as,  for  example,  to  the  sons  of  David  (2  Sam.  viii.  18),  a  mode  of  expres-
sion which  is  thus  correctly  paraphrased  in  I  Chron.  xviii.  17  :  "  And  the  sons  of
David  were  at  the  hand  of  the  king."

2  Numb,  xviii.  7.  *  Heb.  v.  4.


62  The  Te7nple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

also  otherwise  shown  forth.  The  bodily  qualifications  required
in  the  priesthood,  the  kind  of  defilements  which  would  tem-
porarily or  wholly  interrupt  their  functions,  their  mode  of
ordination^  and  even  every  portion,  material,  and  colour  of
their  distinctive  dress  were  all  intended  to  express  in  a  sym-
bolical manner  this  characteristic  of  holiness.  In  all  these
respects  there  was  a  difference  between  Israel  and  the  tribe
of  Levi ;  between  the  tribe  of  Levi  and  the  family  of  Aaron  ;
and,  finally,  between  an  ordinary  priest  and  the  high-priest,
who  most  fully  typified  our  Great  High-priest,  in  whom  all
these  symbols  have  found  their  reality.

This  much  it  seemed  necessary  to  state   for  the  general
understanding   of  the  matter.      Full   details  belong  to  the
exposition  of  the  meaning  and  object  of  the  Levitical  priest-
hood, as  instituted  by  God,  while  our  present  task  rather  is
to  trace  its  further  development  to  what  it  was  at  the  time
when  Jesus  was   in  the  Temple.      The   first   peculiarity   of
post-Mosaic  times  which  we  here  meet,  is  the  arrangement
of    the   priesthood   into    "  twenty-four    courses,"   which    un-
doubtedly  dates   from   the    times    of    David.      But   Jewish
tradition  would  make  it  even   much  older.     For,  according
to  the  Talmud,  it   should  be   traced  up  to  Moses,  who  is
variously   supposed   to   have   arranged   the    sons    of  Aaron
into   eight   or   else   sixteen   courses   (four,  or  else  eight,    of
Eleazar  ;    and  the  other  four,  or  else  eight,  of  Ithamar),  to
which,  on  the  one  supposition,  Samuel  and  David  each  added
other  eight  "courses,"  or,  on  the  other,  Samuel  and  David,
in  conjunction,  the    eight   needed  to  make  up   the   twenty-
four  mentioned  in   I  Chron.  xxiv.     It  need  scarcely  be  told
that,    like   many  similar   statements,  this  also  is  simply  an
attempt   to    trace   up   every   arrangement   to   the   fountain-


The  Officiating  Priesthood.  63

head    of  Jewish  history,  in   order  to   establish   its   absolute
authority.^

The  institution  of  David  and  of  Solomon  continued  till
the  Babylonish  captivity.  Thence,  however,  only  four  out
of  the  twenty-four  "  courses  "  returned  :  those  of  Jedaiah,
Immer,  Pashur,  and  Harim,^  the  course  of  Jedaiah"  being
placed  first  because  it  was  of  the  high-priest's  family,  "  of
the  house  of  Jeshua,"  ''  the  son  of  Jozadak."  ^  To  restore
the  original  number,  each  of  these  four  families  was  directed
to  draw  five  lots  for  those  which  had  not  returned,  so  as  to
form  once  more  twenty-four  courses,  which  were  to  bear  the
ancient  names.  Thus,  for  example,  Zacharias,  the  father  of
John  the  Baptist,  did  not  really  belong  to  the  family  of
Abijah,^  which  had  not  returned  from  Babylon,  but  to  the
'*  course  of  Abia,"  which  had  been  formed  out  of  some  other
family,  and  only  bore  the  ancient  name.^  Like  the  priests,
the  Levites  had  at  the  time  of  King  David  been  arranged
into  twenty-four  "courses,"  which  were  to  act  as  "priests'
assistants,"^  as  "singers  and  musicians,"^  as  "gate-keepers
and  guards,"^  and  as  "officers  and  judges."  Of  these  various
classes,  that  of  the  "  priests'  assistants  "  was  by  far  the  most
numerous,^  and  to  them  the  charge  of  the  Temple  had  been
committed  in  subordination  to  the  priests.  It  had  been  their
duty  to  look  after  the   sacred  vestments  and  vessels ;   the

*  Curiously  enough,  here  also  the  analogy  between  Rabbinism  and  Roman
Catholicism  holds  good.  Each  claims  for  its  teaching  and  practices  the  sio-called
principle  of  catholicity — ** semper,  ubique,  ab  omnibus"  ("always,  everywhere,
by  all "),  and  each  invents  the  most  curious  historical  fables  in  support  of  At !

2  Ezra  ii.  36,  37,  38,  39.  ^  Ezra  iii.  2  ;  Hagg.  i.  I  ;  I  Chron.  vi.  1 5,

*  I  Chron.  xxiv.  10.  ^  Luke  i.  5.  ^  I  Chron.  xxiii.  4,  2Si
'  I  Chron.  xxv.  6.                       ^  i  Chron.  xxvi.  6  and  following.

*  Apparently  it  numbered  24,cxx>,  out  of  a  total  of  38,000  Levites.


^4         'I^^^  Te^nple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

store-houses  and  their  contents  ;  and  the  preparation  of  the
shewbread,  of  the  meat-offerings,  of  the  spices,  etc.  They
were  also  generally  to  assist  the  priests  in  their  work,  to  see
to  the  cleaning  of  the  sanctuary,  and  to  take  charge  of  the
treasuries.^  Of  course  these  services,  as  also  those  of  the
singers  and  musicians,  and  of  the  porters  and  guards,  were
retained  in  the  Temple  of  Herod.  But  for  the  employment
of  Levites  as  ''officers  and  judges"  there  was  no  further  room,
not  only  because  such  judicial  functions  as  still  remained  to
the  Jews  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Sanhedrim  and  its  sub-
ordinate authorities,  but  also  because  in  general  the  ranks  of
the  Levites  were  so  thinned.  In  point  of  fact,  while  no  less
than  4,289  priests  had  returned  from  Babylon,  the  number
of  Levites  was  under  400,^  of  whom  only  74  were  "  priests'
assistants."  To  this  the  next  immigration,  under  Ezra,  added
only  38,  and  that  though  the  Levites  had  been  specially
searched  for.^  According  to  tradition,  Ezra  punished  them
by  deprivmg  them  of  their  tithes.  The  gap  in  their  number
was  filled  up  by  220  Nethinim,*  literally,  "given  ones,"
probably  originally  strangers  and  captives,^  as  in  all  likeli-
hood the  Gibeonites  had  been  the  first  "Nethinim."^  Though
the  Nethinim,  like  the  Levites  and  priests,  were  freed  from
all  taxation,'^  and  perhaps  also  from  military  service,^  the
Rabbinists  held  them  in  the  lowest  repute — beneath  a
bastard,  though  above  a  proselyte,- — forbade  their  intermarry-

1  I  Chron.  xxiii.  28-32.  •  Ezra  ii.  40-42  ;  Nehemiah  vii.  43-45.

8  Ezra  viii.  15,  18,  19.  *  Ezra  viii.  20.

5  This  is  also  confirmed  by  their  foreign  names  (Ezra  ii.  43-58).  The  total
number  of  Nethinim  who  returned  from  Babylon  was  612 — 392  with  Zerubbabel
(Ezra  ii.  58  ;  Nehemiah  vii.  60),  and  220  with  Ezra  (Ezra  viii.  20.)

*  Josh.  ix.  21,  23,  27.  "^  Ezra  vii.  24.  ^  Jqs^  ^^^^  ijj^  j2;  iv.  4,  3.


The  Officiating  Priesthood.  65,

ing  with   Israelites,  and  declared  them  incapable  of  proper
membership  in  the  congregation.^

The  duties  of  priests  and  Levites  in  the  Temple  may
be  gathered  from  Scripture,  and  will  be  further  explained
in  the  course  of  our  inquiries.  Generally,  it  may  here  be
stated  that  on  the  Levites  devolved  the  Temple-police,  the
guard  of  the  gates,  and  the  duty  of  keeping  everything
about  the  sanctuary  clean  and  bright.  But  as  at  night  the
priests  kept  watch  about  the  innermost  places  of  the  Temple,
so  they  also  opened  and  closed  all  the  inner  gates,  while  the
Levites  discharged  this  duty  in  reference  to  the  outer  gates,
vhich  led  upon  the  Temple  Mount  (or  Court  of  the  Gentiles),
md  to  the  "Beautiful  Gate,"  which  formed  the  principal
entrance  into  the  *'  Court  of  the  Women.*'  The  laws  of  Leviti-
cal  cleanness,  as  explained  by  the  Rabbis,  were  most  rigidly
enforced  upon  worshippers  and  priests.  If  a  leper,  or  any
other  who  was  "defiled,"  had  ventured  into  the  sanctuary
itself,  or  any  priest  officiated  in  a  state  of  "  uncleanness,"  he
would,  if  discovered,  be  dragged  out  and  killed,  without  form
of  process,  by  "  the  rebels'  beating."  Minor  punishments  were
awarded  to  those  guilty  of  smaller  offences  of  the  same  kind.
The  Sabbath-rest  was  strictly  enforced,  so  far  as  consistent
with  the  necessary  duties  of  the  Temple  service.  But  the
latter  superseded  the  Sabbath  law^  and  defilement  on  account
of  death.^  If  the  time  for  offering  a  sacrifice  was  not  fixed,
so  that  it  might  be  brought  on  one  day  as  well  as  another,  then
the  service  did  not  supersede  either  the  Sabbath  or  defilement
on  account  of  death.  But  where  the  time  was  unalterably
fixed,  there  the  higher  duty  of  obedience  to  a  direct  command

*  So  in  many  passages  of  the  Talmud.  2  Matt.  xii.  5.

*  See  Maimonides,   Yad  ha  Chas,  Biath.  Mikd.  iv.  9,  etc.


66  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

came  in  to  supersede  alike  the  Sabbath  and  this  one  (but  only
this  one)  ground  of  defilement.  The  same  principle  applied
to  worshippers  as  well  as  priests.

Each  "  course "  of  priests  and  of  Levites  (as  has  already
been  stated)  came  on  duty  for  a  week,  from  one  Sabbath  to
another.  The  service  of  the  week  was  subdivided  among  the
various  families  which  constituted  a  "course;"  so  that  if  it
consisted  of  five  "houses  of  fathers,"  three  served  each  one
day,  and  two  each  two  days  ;  if  of  six  families,  five  served
each  one  day,  and  one  two  days ;  if  of  eight  families,  six
served  each  one  day,  and  the  other  two  in  conjunction  on
one  day ;  or,  lastly,  if  of  nine  families,  five  served  each  one
day,  and  the  other  four  took  it  two  in  conjunction  for  two
days.^  These  divisions  and  arrangements  were  made  by
*'  the  chiefs "  or  "  heads  of  the  houses  of  their  fathers."
On  Sabbaths  the  whole  "  course "  was  on  duty ;  on  feast
days  any  priest  might  come  up  and  join  in  the  ministra-
tions of  the  sanctuary ;  and  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  all
the  twenty-four  courses  were  bound  to  be  present  and  officiate.
While  actually  engaged  on  service  in  the  Temple,  the  priests
were  not  allowed  to  drink  wine,  either  by  day  or  by  night.
The  other  "  families  "  or  "  houses  "  also  of  the  "  course  "  who
were  in  attendance  at  Jerusalem,  though  not  on  actual  duty,
were,  during  their  week  of  ministry,  prohibited  the  use  of  wine,
except  at  night,  because  they  might  have  to  be  called  in  to  assist
their  brethren  of  the  officiating  "  family,"  which  they  could
not  do  if  they  had  partaken  of  strong  drink.  The  law  even
made  (a  somewhat  curious)  provision  to  secure  that  the  priests

^  Some  have  imagined  that  every  "course"  was  arranged  into  six,  or  else
into  seven  **  families,"  but  the  view  in  the  text  expresses  most  likely  the  correct
tradition.


The  Officiating  Priesthood.  67

should  come  up  to  Jerusalem  properly  trimmed,  washed,  and
attired,  so  as  to  secure  the  decorum  of  the  service.^

It  would  be  difficult  to  conceive  arrangements  more
thoroughly  or  consistently  opposed  to  what  are  commonly
called  "  priestly  pretensions,"  than  those  of  the  Old  Testament.
The  fundamental  principle,  laid  down  at  the  outset,  that  all
Israel  were  "a  kingdom  of  priests,"^  made  the  priesthood
only  representatives  of  the  people.  Their  income,  which
even  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances  must  have
been  moderate,  was,  as  we  have  seen,  dependent  on  the
varying  religious  state  of  the  nation,  since  no  law  existed
by  which  either  the  payment  of  tithes  or  any  other  offerings
could  be  enforced.  How  Httle  power  or  influence,  compara-
tively speaking,  the  priesthood  wielded,  is  sufficiently  known
from  Jewish  history.  Out  of  actual  service  neither  the
priests  nor  even  the  high- priest  wore  a  distinctive  dress,^
and  though  a  number  of  civil  restrictions  were  laid  on  priests,
there  were  few  corresponding  advantages.  It  is  indeed  true
that  alliances  with  distinguished  priestly  families  were  eagerly
sought,  and  that  during  the  troubled  period  of  Syrian  domi-
nation the  high-priest  for  a  time  held  civil  as  well  as  reli-
gious rule.  But  the  latter  advantage  was  dearly  bought,  both
as  regarded  the  priests  and  the  nation.  Nor  must  we  forget
the  powerful  controlling  influence  which  Rabbinism  exercised.
Its  tendency,  which  must  never  be  lost  sight  of  in  the  study
of  the  state  of  Palestine  at  the  time  of  our  Lord,  was  steadily
against  all  privileges  other  than  those  gained  by  traditionary
learning  and  theological  ingenuity.  The  Pharisee,  or,  rather,
the  man  learned  in  the  traditional  law,  was  everything  both

^  Comp.  Relandus,    Antiq.^  p.  169.  ^  Ex.  xix.  5>  6.

*  Comp.  Acts  xxiii.  5  ;  see  also  chap.  vii.


68  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

before  God  and  before  man ;  "but  this  people,  who  knoweth  not
the  law,"  were  "  cursed,"  plebeians,  country  people,  unworthy
of  any  regard  or  attention.  Rabbinism  applied  these  principles
even  in  reference  to  the  priesthood.  It  divided  all  priests  into
''  learned  "  and  "  unlettered,"  and  excluded  the  latter  from  some
of  the  privileges  of  their  own  order.  Thus  there  were  certain
priestly  dues  which  the  people  might  at  will  give  to  any
priest  they  chose.  But  from  some  of  them  the  ''  unlettered  "
priests  were  debarred,  on  the  ostensible  ground  that  in  their
ignorance  they  might  have  partaken  of  them  in  a  state  of
Levitical  uncleanness,  and  so  committed  mortal  sin.

In  general,  the  priests  had  to  undergo  a  course  of  instruc-
tion, and  were  examined  before  being  allowed  to  officiate.
Similarly,  they  were  subject  to  the  ordinary  tribunals,  com-
posed of  men  learned  in  the  law,  without  regard  to  their
descent  from  one  or  another  tribe.  The  ordained  "  rulers "
of  the  synagogues,  the  teachers  of  the  people,  the  leaders  of
their  devotions,  and  all  other  officials  were  not  necessarily
"  priests,"  but  simply  chosen  for  their  learning  and  fitness.
Any  one  whom  the  "  elders  "  or  ''  rulers  "  deemed  qualified
for  it  mi^ht,  at  their  "request,  address  to  the  people  on  the
Sabbath  a  "word  of  exhortation."  Even  the  high-priest  him-
self was  answerable  to  the  Sanhedrim.  It  is  distinctly  stated,
that  "  if  he  committed  an  ofience  which  by  the  law  deserved
whipping,  the  Great  Sanhedrim  whipt  him,  and  then  had  him
restored  again  to  his  office."  Every  year  a  kind  of  ecclesias-
tical council  was  appointed  to  instruct  him  in  his  duties  for
the  Day  of  Atonement,  "  in  case  he  were  not  learned,"  or,  at
any  rate,  to  see  to  it  that  he  knew  and  remembered  them.
Nay,  the  principle  was  broadly  laid  down — that  "  a  scholar,
diough  he  were  a  bastard,  was  of  far  higher  value  than  an


The  Officiating  Priesthood.  69

unlearned  high-priest."  Ff,  besides  all  this,  it  is  remembered
how  the  political  influence  of  the  high-priest  had  decayed  in
the  days  of  Herod,  and  how  frequently  the  occupants  of  that
office  changed,  through  the  caprice  of  the  rulers  or  through
bribery,  the  state  of  public  feeling  will  be  readily  understood.

At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  admitted,  that  generally
speaking  the  high-priest  would,  of  necessity,  wield  very  con-
siderable influence,  and  that,  ordinarily,  those  who  held  the
sacred  office  were  not  only  "lettered,"  but  members  of  the
Sanhedrim.  According  to  Jewish  tradition,  the  high-priest
ought,  in  every  respect,  to  excel  all  other  priests,  and  if  he
were  poor,  the  rest  were  to  contribute,  so  as  to  secure  him  an
independent  fortune.  Certain  marks  of  outward  respect  were
also  shown  him.  When  he  entered  the  Temple  he  was  accom-
panied by  three  persons — one  walking  at  each  side,  the  third
behind  him.  He  might,  without  being  appointed  to  it,
officiate  in  any  part  of  the  Temple  services  ;  he  had  certain
exceptional  rights ;  and  he  possessed  a  house  in  the  Temple,
where  he  lived  by  day,  retiring  only  at  night  to  his  own  home,
which  must  be  within  Jerusalem,  and  to  which  he  was
escorted  by  the  people  after  the  solemnities  of  the  Day  of
Atonement,  which  devolved  almost  exclusively  upon  him.

Originally  the  office  of  high-priest  was  regarded  as  being
held  for  life  and  hereditary  ;^  but  the  troubles  of  later
times  made  it  a  matter  of  cabal,  crime,  or  bribery.  Without
here  entering  into  the  complicated  question  of  the  succession
to  the  high-priesthood,  the  following  may  be  quoted  from  the
Tal  nud,^  without,  of  course,  guaranteeing  its  absolute  accu-
racy :  "  In  the  first  Temple,^  the  high-priests  served,  the  son

'Accordingto  the  Rabbis,  he  was  appointed  by  the  Sanhedrim.     ^  Talmud  Jer.  loina,  I.
*  This,  of  course,  does  not  include  the  period  before  the  first  Temple  was  built.


fo         The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

succeeding  the  father,  and  they  were  eighteen  in  number.
But  in  the  second  Temple  they  got  the  high-priesthood  for
money  ;  and  there  are  who  say  they  destroyed  each  other  by
witchcraft,  so  that  some  reckon  80  high-priests  during'  that
period,  others  81,  others  82,  83,  84,  and  even  85/*  The  Rabbis
enumerate  18  high-priests  during  the  first  Temple;  Lightfoot
counts  53  from  the  return  from  Babylon  to  Matthias,  when  the
last  war  of  the  Jews  began  ;  while  Relandius  reckons  57.
But  there  is  both  difficulty  and  confusion  amid  the  constant
changes  at  the  last.

There  was  not  any  fixed  age  for  entering  on  the  office  of
high-priest,  any  more  than  on  that  of  an  ordinary  priest.
The  Talmudists  put  it  down  at  twenty  years.  But  the  un-
happy descendant  of  the  Maccabees,  Aristobulus,  was  only
sixteen  years  of  age  when  his  beauty,  as  he  officiated  as  high-
priest  in  the  Temple,  roused  the  jealousy  of  Herod,  and  procured
his  death.  The  entrance  of  the  Levites  is  fixed,  in  the  sacred
text,  at  thirty  during  the  wilderness  period,  and  after  that,  when
the  work  would  require  less  bodily  strength,  but  a  larger  number
of  ministers,  at  twenty-five  years  of  age.^

No  special  disqualifications  for  the  Levitical  office  existed,
though*  the  Rabbis  insist  that  a  good  voice  was  absolutely
necessary.  It  was  otherwise  with  the  priest's  office.  The  first
inquiry  instituted  by  the  Sanhedrim,  who  for  the  purpose  sat
daily  in  '*  the  Hall  of  Polished  Stones,"  was  into  the  genealog}^
of  a  candidate.  Certain  genealogies  were  deemed  authoritative.
Thus,  "  if  his  father's  name  were  inscribed  in  the  archives  of
Jeshana  at  Zipporim,  no  further  inquiry  was  made."  If  he  failed
to  satisfy  the  court  about  his  perfect  legitimacy,  the  candidate

*  It  is  thus  we  reconcile  Numbers  iv.  3  with  viii.  24,  25.  In  point  of  fact,  these
two  reasons  are  expressly  mentioned  in  i  Chron.  xxiii.  24-27,  as  influencing
David  still  further  to  lower  the  age  of  entrance  to  twenty.


The  Officiating  Priesthood,  71

was  dressed  and  veiled  in  black,  and  permanently  removed.
If  he  passed  that  ordeal,  inquiry  was  next  made  as  to  any
physical  defects,  of  which  Maimonides  enumerates  a  hundred
and  forty  that  permanently,  and  twenty-two  which  temporarily
disqualified  for  the  exercise  of  the  priestly  office.  Persons
so  disqualified  were,  however,  admitted  to  menial  offices,  such
as  in  the  wood-chamber,  and  entitled  to  Temple  support.
Those  who  had  stood  the  twofold  test  were  dressed  in  white
raiment,  and  their  names  properly  inscribed.  To  this  pointed
allusion  is  made  in  Revelation  iii.  5,  "He  that  overcometh,
the  same  shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment ;  and  I  will  not
blot  out  his  name  out  of  the  book  of  life.''

Thus  received,  and  afterwards  instructed  in  his  duties,  the
formal  admission  alike  of  the  priest  and  of  the  high-priest  was
not,  as  of  old,  by  anointing,  but  simply  by  investiture.  For
even  the  composition  of  the  sacred  oil  was  no  longer  known
in  the  second  Temple.  They  were  called  "high-priests  by
investiture,"  and  regarded  as  of  inferior  rank  to  those  "  by
anointing."  As  for  the  common  priests,  the  Rabbis  held  that
they  were  not  anointed  even  in  the  first  Temple,  the  rite
which  was  applied  to  the  sons  of  Aaron  being  valid  also  for
their  descendants.  It  was  otherwise  in  the  case  of  the  high-
priest.  His  investiture  was  continued  during  seven  days.  In
olden  days,  w^hen  he  was  anointed,  the  sacred  oil  was  not  only
"  poured  over  him,"  but  also  applied  to  his  forehead,  over  the
eyes,  as  tradition  has  it,  after  the  form  of  the  Greek  letter  X.
The  coincidence  is  certainly  curious.  This  sacred  oil  was
besides  only  used  for  anointing  such  kings  as  were  of  the
family  of  David,  not  other  Jewish  monarchs,  and  if  their
succession  had  been  called  in  question.  Otherwise  the  royal
dignity  went,  as  a  matter  of  course,  by  inheritance  from
father  to  son.     The  high-priests  ''by   investiture"  had  not


72  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

any  more  the  real  Urim  and  Thummim  (their  meaning  even
being  unknown),  though  a  breast-plate,  with  twelve  stones,
was  made  and  worn,  in  order  to  complete  the  eight  sacred  vest-
ments. This  was  just  double  the  number  of  those  worn  by  an
ordinary  priest,  viz.,  the  linen  breeches,  the  coat,  the  girdle,
and  the  bonnet.  To  these  the  high-priest  added  other  four
distinctive  articles  of  dress,  called  "  golden  vestments,*-
because,  unlike  the  robes  of  the  ordinary  priests,  gold^  the
symbol  of  splendour,  appeared  in  them.  They  were  the
Me'il^  or  robe  of  the  ephod,  wholly  of  "woven  work,"  of  dark
blue  colour,  descending  to  the  knees,  and  adorned  at  the  hem
by  alternate  blossoms  of  the  pomegranate  in  blue,  purple,  and
scarlet,  and  golden  bells,  the  latter,  according  to  tradition,
seventy-two  in  number  ;  the  Ephod  with  the  breast-plate,  the
former  of  the  four  colours  of  the  sanctuary  (white,  blue,  purple,
and  scarlet),  and  inwrought  with  threads  of  gold  ;  the  Mi^re;
and,  lastly,  the  Zzz,  or  golden  frontlet.  If  either  a  priest  or
the  high-priest  officiated  without  wearing  the  full  number  of
his  vestments,  his  service  would  be  invalid,  as  also  if  any-
thing, however  trifling  (such,  for  instance,  as  a  plaster),  had
intervened  between  the  body  and  the  dress  of  the  priest.
The  material  of  which  the  four  vestments  of  the  ordinary
priest  were  made  was  "  linen  "  or,  more  accurately,  **  byssus,'*
the  white  shining  cotton-stuff  of  Egypt.  These  two  qualities
of  the  byssus  are  specially  marked  as  characteristic,^  and  on
them  part  of  the  symbolic  meaning  depended.  Hence  we
read  in  Rev.  xix.  8,  "  And  to  her  " — the  wife  of  the  Lamb
made  ready — "  was  granted  that  she  should  be  arrayed  in
byssus  vestments,  shining  and  pure ;  for  the  byssus  vestment
is  the  righteousness  of  the  saints.''^

*  Rev.  XV.  6,  "  clothed  in  pure  and  shining  linen."  *  So  literally.


The  Officiating  Priesthood.  73

We  add  some  further  particulars,  chiefly  in  illustration*  of
allusions  in  the  New  Testament.  The  priest's  "  coat  "  was
woven  of  one  piece,  like  the  seamless  robe  of  the  Saviour.^
As  it  was  close-fitting,  the  girdle  could  not,  strictly  speaking,
have  been  necessary.  Besides,  although  the  account  of  the
Rabbis,  that  the  priest's  girdle  was  three  fingers  broad  and
sixteen  yards  long  (!),  is  exaggerated,  no  doubt  it  really
reached  beyond  the  feet,  and  required  to  be  throw^n  over  the
shoulder  during  ministration.  Hence  its  object  must  chiefly
have  been  symbolical.  In  point  of  fact,  it  may  be  regarded
as  the  most  distinctive  priestly  vestment,  since  it  was  only
put  on  during  actual  ministration,  and  put  off  immediately
aftenvards.  Accordingly,  when  in  Revelation  i.  13,  the
Saviour  is  seen  "in  the  midst  of  the  candlesticks,"  ''girt  about
the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle,"  we  are  to  understand  by  it
that  our  heavenly  High-Priest  is  there  engaged  in  actual
ministry  for  us.  Similarly,  the  girdle  is  described  as  "  about
the  paps,"  or  (as  in  Rev.  xv.  6)  about  the  ''  breasts,"  as  both  the
girdle  of  the  ordinary  priest  and  that  on  the  ephod  which  the
high-priest  w^ore  were  girded  there,  and  not  round  the  loins.^
Lastly,  the  expression  "  golden  girdle  "  may  bear  reference  to
the  circumstance  that  the  dress  peculiar  of  the  high-priest  was
called  his  ''golden  vestments,"  in  contradistinction  to  the
"  linen  vestments,"  w^hich  he  wore  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.

Of  the  four  distinctive  articles  in  the  high-priest's  dress,
the  breastplate,  alike  from  its  square  form  and  the  twelve
jewels  on  it,  bearing  the  names  of  the  tribes,  suggests
**the  city  four-square,"  whose  "foundations"  are  twelve
precious  stones.^  The  "mitre"  of  the  high-priest  diff'ered
from  the  head-gear  of  the  ordinary  priest,  which  was  shaped

^  John  xix.  23.         2  Compare  Ezek.  xliv.  i8.         ^  Rev.  xxi.  1 6,  19,  20.


74         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

like  the  inverted  calyx  of  a  flower,  in  size  and  probably  also
somewhat  in  shape.  According  to  liie  Rabbis,  it  was  eight
yards  high  (! !).  Fastened  to  it  by  two  (according  to  the  Rabbis,
by  three)  ribbons  oi  "  blue  lace  "  was  the  symbol  of  royalty —
the  "  golden  plate  "  (or  Ziz),  on  which, "  Holiness  unto  Jehovah"
was  graven.  This  plate  was  only  two  fingers  wide,  and  reached
from  temple  to  temple.  Between  this  plate  and  the  mitre  the
high-priest  is  by  some  supposed  to  have  worn  his  phylac-
teries. But  this  cannot  be  regarded  as  by  any  means  a  settled
point.  According  to  the  distinct  testimony  of  the  Talmud,^
neither  priests,  Levites,  nor  the  ^'  stationary  men  "  wore  phy-
lacteries during  their  actual  service  in  the  Temple.  This  is  a
strong  point  urged  by  the  modern  Karaite  Jews  against  the
traditions  of  the  Rabbis.  Can  it  be,  that  the  wearing  of
phylacteries  at  the  time  of  Christ  was  7tot  a  universally
acknowledged  obligation,  but  rather  the  badge  of  a  party }
This  would  give  additional  force  to  the  words  in  which  Christ
inveighed  against  those  who  made  broad  their  phylacteries.
According  to  Josephus,  the  original  Ziz  of  Aaron  still  existed
in  his  time,  and  was  carried  with  other  spoils  to  Rome.
There  R.  Eliezer  saw  it  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian.  Thence
we  can  trace  it,  with  considerable  probability,  through  many
vicissitudes,  to  the  time  of  Belisarius,  and  to  Byzantium.
From  there  it  was  taken  by  order  of  the  emperor  to  Jeru-
salem. What  became  of  it  afterwards  is  unknown  ;  pos-
sibly it  may  still  be  in  existence.^  It  only  requires  to  be
added  that  the  priests'  garments,  when  soiled,  were  not
washed,  but  used  as  wicks  for  the  lamps  in  the  Temple ;

^  Zebach,  xix.  a.  6.     See  Jost,  Gesch.  d.  yudenth.  vol.  ii.,  p.  309.

^  V^hen  Josephus  speaks  of  a  triple  crown  worn  by  the  high-priest,  this  may  have
been  introduced  by  the  Asmoneans  when  they  united  the  temporal  monarchy  with
the  priesthood.     Compare  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible^  i.  807a.


The  Officiating  Priesthood.  75

those  of  the  high-priest  were  "hid  away."  The  high-priest
wore  "  a  fresh  suit  of  linen  vestments  "  each  time  on  the  Day
of  Atonement.

The  priesthood  ministering  in  the  Temple  were  arranged
into  *'  ordinary "  priests  and  various  officials.  Of  the  latter
there  were,  besides  the  high-priest/  the  "  Sagan,"  or  suffragan
priest ;  two  "  Katholikin,"  or  chief  treasurers  and  overseers ;
seven  '*  Ammarcalin,"  who  were  subordinate  to  the  Katholikin,
and  had  chief  charge  of  all  the  gates;  and  three  ''Gizbarin/*
or  under-treasurers.  These  fourteen  officers,  ranking  in  the
order  mentioned,  formed  the  standing  "council  of  the
Temple,"  which  regulated  everything  connected  with  the
affairs  and  services  of  the  sanctuary.  Its  members  were
also  called  "  the  elders  of  the  priests,"  or  "  the  counsellors."
This  judicatory,  which  ordinarily  did  not  busy  itself  with
criminal  questions,  apparently  took  a  leading  part  in  the
condemnation  of  Jesus.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  well
to  remember  that  they  were  not  all  of  one  mind,  since
Joseph  of  Arimathea  belonged  to  their  number — the  title
by  which  he  is  designated  in  Mark  xv.  43  being  exactly
the  same  word  as  that  applied  in  the  Talmud  to  the  members
of  this  priestly  council.

It  is  difficult  to  specify  the  exact  duties  of  each  of  these
classes  of  officials.  The  "  Sagan  "  (or  "  Segen,"  or  "  Segan  ")
would  officiate  for  the  high-priest,  when  from  any  cause  he  was
incapacitated  ;  he  would  act  generally  as  his  assistant,  and
take  the  oversight  of  all  the  priests,  whence  he  is  called  in
Scripture  "  second  priest,"^  and  in  Talmudical  writings  ''the

^  The  Rabbis  speak  of  a  high-priest  ordained  '*  for  war,"  who  accompanied
the  people  to  battle,  but  no  historical  trace  of  a  distinct  office  of  this  kind  can  be
discovered.

2  2  Kings  XXV.  18  i  Jer.  lii.  24.


76  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Sagan  of  the  priests/*^  A  ^'Chananjah"  is  mentioned  in  the
Talmud  as  a  Sagan,  but  whether  or  not  he  was  the  "Annas  "
of  the  New  Testament  must  be  left  undecided.  The  two
Katholikin  were  to  the  Sagan  what  he  was  to  the  high-
priest,  though  their  chief  duty  seems  to  have  been  about  the
treasures  of  the  Temple.^  Similarly,  the  seven  Ammarcalin
were  assistants  of  the  Katholikin,  though  they  had  special
charge  of  the  gates,  the  holy  vessels,  and  the  holy  vestments ;
and  again  the  three  (or  else  seven),  "  Gizbarin  *'  assistants  of  the
Ammarcalin.  The  title  "  Gizbar  "  occurs  so  early  as  Ezra  i.  8  ;
but  its  exact  meaning  seems  to  have  been  already  unknown
when  the  LXX  translated  that  book.  They  appear  to  have
had  charge  of  all  dedicated  and  consecrated  things,  of  the
Temple  tribute,  of  the  redemption  money,  etc.,  and  to  have
decided  all  questions  connected  with  such  matter^.

Next  in  rank  to  these  officials  were  the  "  heads  of  each
course  '*  on  duty  for  a  week,  and  then  the  "  heads  of
families  "  of  every  course.  After  them  followed  fifteen  over-
seers, viz.,  "  the  overseer  concerning  the  times,"  who  sum-
moned priests  and  people  to  their  respective  duties ;  the
overseer  for  shutting  the  doors  (under  the  direction,  of  course,
of  the  Ammarcalin) ;  the  overseer  of  the  guards,  or  captain  of
the  Temple  ;  the  overseer  of  the  singers  and  of  those  who  blew
the  trumpets  ;  the  overseer  of  the  cymbals ;  the  overseer  of
the  lots,  which  were  drawn  every  morning  ;  the  overseer  of
the  birds,  who  had  to  provide  the  turtle-doves  and  pigeon^
for  those  who  brought  such  offerings  ;  the  overseer  of  the

1  We  may  here  at  once  dismiss  the  theory  that  the  Sagan  was  the  elected  suc-
cessor of  the  high-priest.

*  Thus  in  Bamidbar  Rabba  (sect.  14,  fol.  271^),  Korah  is  described  as  Katholicus
to  the  King  of  Egypt,  who  *'had  the  keys  of  his  treasures."  Compare  Buxiorff
in  vocem.


The  Ojjiciating  Priesthood.  77

seals,  who  dispensed  the  four  counterfoils  for  the  various
meat-offerings  suited  for  different  sacrifices  ;  the  overseer  of
the  drink-offerings,  for  a  similar  purpose  to  the  above  ;  the
overseer  of  the  sick,  or  the  Temple  physician ;  the  overseer
of  the  water,  who  had  charge  of  the  water-supply  and  the
drainage  ;  the  overseer  for  making  the  shewbread  ;  for  pre-
paring the  incense  ;  for  making  the  vails  ;  and  for  providing
the  priestly  garments.  All  these  officers  had,  of  course,  sub-
ordinates, whom  they  chose  and  employed,  either  for  the
day  or  permanently  ;  and  it  was  their  duty  to  see  to  all  the
arrangements  connected  with  their  respective  departments.
Thus,  not  to  speak  of  instructors,  examiners  of  sacrifices,  and
a  great  variety  of  artificers,  there  must  have  been  sufficient
employment  in  the  Temple  for  a  very  large  number  of  persons.
We  must  not  close  without  enumerating  the  twenty-four
sources  whence,  according  to  the  Talmud,  the  priests  derived
their  support.^  Of  these  ten  were  only  available  while  in  the
Temple  itself,  four  in  Jerusalem,  and  the  remaining  ten
throughout  the  Holy  Land.  Those  which  might  only  be
used  in  the  Temple  itself  were  the  priest's  part  of  the  sin-
offering  ;  that  of  the  trespass-offering  for  a  known,  and  for  a
doubtful  trespass  ;  public  peace-offerings  ;  the  leper's  log  of
oil ;  the  two  Pentecostal  loaves  ;  the  shewbread  ;  what  was
left  of  meat-offerings,  and  the  omer  at  the  Passover.  The
four  which  might  be  used  only  in  Jerusalem  were  the  first-
lings of  beasts,  the  Biccurim,^  the  portion    from  the  thank-

*  The  Rabbis  also  enumerate  fifteen  functions  which  were  peculiar  to  the  priest's
service.  But  as  each  of  them  will  find  its  place  in  subsequent  chapters  we  do  rot
recount  them  here.  The  curious  reader  is  referred  to  Relandus,  Antiq.  (ed.  Bud-
deus),  pp.  176,  177.

To  prevent  mistakes,  we  may  state  that  the  term  *'Therumoth"  is,  in  a
general  way,  used  to  desis^nate  the  prepared  produce,  such  as  oil,  flour,  wine ;  and
"Biccm-im,"  the  natural  product  of  the  soil,  such  as  corn,  fmits,  etc


78         Tlie  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

offering,^  and  from  the  Nazarite's  goat,  and  the  skins  of  the
holy  sacrifices.  Of  the  ten  which  might  be  used  throughout
the  land,  five  could  be  given  at  will  to  any  priest,  viz.,  the
tithe  of  the  tithe,  the  heave-offering  of  the  dough,^  the  first
of  the  fleece,  and  the  priest's  due  of  meat.^  The  other  five,
it  was  thought,  should  be  given  to  the  priests  of  the  special
course  on  duty  for  the  week,  viz.,  the  redemption-money
for  a  first-born  son,  that  for  an  ass,  the  "  sanctified  field  of
possession,"  *  what  had  been  ''  devoted,"  and  such  possession
of  **  a  stranger  "  or  proselyte  as,  having  been  stolen,  was
restored  to  the  priests  after  the  death  of  the  person  robbed,
with  a  fifth  part  additional.  Finally,  to  an  unlettered
priest  it  was  only  lawful  to  give  the  following  from  among
the  various  dues :  things  *'  devoted,"  the  first-born  of  cattle,
the  redemption  of  a  son,  that  of  an  ass,  the  priest* s  due,^
the  first  of  the  wool,  the  "  oil  of  burning,"^  the  ten  things
which  were  to  be  used  in  the  Temple  itself,  and  the  Biccurim.
On  the  other  hand,  the  high-priest  had  the  right  to  take
what  portion  of  the  offerings  he  chose,  and  one  half  of  the
shewbread  every  Sabbath  also  belonged  to  kim.

Thus  elaborate  in  every  particular  was  the  system  which
regulated  the  admission,  the  services,  and  the  privileges  of
the  officiating  priesthood.  Yet  it  has  all  vanished,  not
leaving  behind  it  in  the  synagogue  even  a  single  trace  of  its
complicated  and  perfect  arrangements.  These  *'old  things
are  passed  away,"  because  they  were  only  "  a  shadow  of
good  things  to  come."  But  ^'  the  substance  is  of  Christ,"
and  '^  He  abideth  an  High-Priest  for  ever."

*  Lev.  vii.  12  ;  xxii.  29,  30.  *  Numb.  xv.  20;  Rom.  xi.  16.

*  Deut,  xviii.  3.  *  Lev.  xxvii.  16.  ^  Deut.  xviii.  3.

•  A  term  meaning  *' defiled  TherumoM'^


CHAPTER  v.

SACRIFICES  :  THEIR  ORDER  AND  THEIR  MEANING.

** There  are  priests  that  offer  gifts  according  to  the  law:   who  serve  unto  the
example  and  shadow  of  heavenly  things."— Heb.  viii.  4,  5.

IT  is  a  curious  fact,  but  sadly  significant,  that  modern
Judaism  should  declare  neither  sacrifices  nor  a  Leviti-
cal  priesthood  to  belong  to  the  essence  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment ;  that,  in  fact,  they  had  been  foreign  elements  imported
into  it — tolerated,  indeed,  by  Moses,  but  against  which  the
prophets  earnestly  protested  and  incessantly  laboured.^  The
only  arguments  by  which  this  strange  statement  is  supported
are,  that  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  contains  merely  a  brief
summary,  not  a  detailed  repetition,  of  sacrificial  ordinances,
and  that  such  passages  as  Isaiah  i.  11,  etc.,  Micah  vi.  6,  etc.^
inveig^h  against  sacrifices  offered  without  real  repentance  or
change  of  mind.  Yet  this  anti-sacrificial,  or,  as  we  may  caU
it,  antl  spiritual,  tendency  is  really  of  much  earlier  date.  Foi
the  saci'ifices  of  the  Old  Testament  were  not  merely  outward
observances — a  sort  of  work-righteousness  which  justified  the
offerer  by  the  mere  fact  of  his  obedience — since  ''it  is  not

^  We  specially  refer  to  Dr.  A.  Geiger,  one  of  the  ablest  Rabbinical  writers  of
Germany,  who  makes  this  argument  the  substance  of  Lect.  v.  in  his  Judenth  t(,  s,
Gesch.  {Judaism  and  its  History).


8o        The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take
away  sins."^  The  sacrifices  of  the  Old  Testament  were
symbolical  and  typical.  An  outward  observance  without
any  real  inward  meaning  is  only  a  ceremony.  But  a  rite
which  has  a  present  spiritual  meaning  is  a  symbol  ;  and  if,
besides,  it  also  points  to  a  future  reality,  conveying  at  the
same  time,  by  anticipation,  the  blessing  that  is  yet  to  appear,
it  is  a  type.  Thus  the  Old  Testament  sacrifices  were  not
only  symbols,  nor  yet  merely  predictions  by  fact  (as  prophecy
is  a  prediction  by  word),  but  they  already  conveyed  to  the
believing  Israelite  the  blessing  that  was  to  flow  from  the
future  reality  to  which  they  pointed.  Hence  the  service  of
the  letter  and  the  work-righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and
Pharisees  ran  directly  contrary  to  this  hope  of  faith  and
spiritual  view  of  sacrifices,  which  placed  all  on  the  level
of  sinners  to  be  saved  by  the  substitution  of  another,  to
whom  they  pointed.  Afterwards,  when  the  destruction  of
the  Temple  rendered  its  services  impossible,  another  and  most
cogent  reason  was  added  for  trying  to  substitute  other  things,
such  as  prayers,  fasts,  etc.,  in  room  of  the  sacrifices.  There-
fore, although  none  of  the  older  Rabbis  has  ventured  on  such
an  assertion  as  that  of  modern  Judaism,  the  tendency  must
have  been  increasingly  in  that  direction.  In  fact,  it  had
become  a  necessity — since  to  declare  sacrifices  of  the  essence
of  Judaism  would  have  been  to  pronounce  modern  Judaism
an  impossibility.  But  thereby  also  the  synagogue  has  given
sentence  against  itself,  and  by  disowning  sacrifices  has  placed
itself  outside  the  pale  of  the  Old  Testament.

Every  unprejudiced   reader  of  the    Bible    must  feel    that
sacrifices  constitute  the  centre  of  the  Old  Testament.     In-

'  Heb.  X.  4.


Sacrifices:  their  Order  and  their  Meaning.      8i

deed,  were  this  the  place,  we  might  argue  from  their  univer-
sahty  that,  along  with  the  acknowledgment  of  a  Divine
power,  the  dim  remembrance  of  a  happy  past,  and  the  hope
of  a  happier  future,  sacrifices  belonged  to  the  primeval
traditions  which  mankind  inherited  frdm  Paradise.  To  sacri-
fice seems  as  ''  natural  "  to  man  as  to  pray ;  the  one  indi-
cates what  he  feels  about  himself,  the  other  what  he  feels
about  God.  The  one  means  a  felt  need  of  propitiation ;  the
other  a  felt  sense  of  dependence.

The  fundamental  idea  of  sacrifice  in  the  Old  Testament
is  that  of  substitution,  which  again  seems  to  imply  everything
else — atonement  and  redemption,  vicarious  punishment  and
forgiveness.  The  first-fruits  go  for  the  whole  products  ;  the
firstlings  for  the  flock  ;  the  redemption-money  for  that  which
cannot  be  ofi*ered  ;  and  the  life  of  the  sacrifice,  which  is  in
its  blood,^  for  the  life  of  the  sacrificer.  Hence  also  the  strict
prohibition  to  partake  of  blood.  Even  in  the  "  Korban,"
gift^  or  free-will  offering,  it  is  still  the  gift  for  the  giver.
This  idea  of  substitution,  as  introduced,  adopted,  and  sanc-
tioned by  God  Himself,  is  expressed  by  the  sacrificial  term
rendered  in  our  version  ''  atonement,"  but  which  really  means
covering,  the  substitute  in  the  acceptance  of  God  taking  the
place  of,  and  so  covering,  as  it  were,  the  person  of  the  offerer.
Hence  the  scriptural  experience  :  ''  Blessed  is  he  whose  trans-
gression is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered  .  .  .  unto  whom
the  Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity;  "^  and  perhaps  also  the  scrip-
tural prayer :  *'  Behold,  O  God,  our  shield,  and  look  upon
the  face  of  Thine  Anointed."*  Such  sacrifices,  however,
necessarily   pointed    to   a   mediatorial    priesthood,    through

^  Lev.  xvii.  ii.  2  Mark  vii.  11.

5  Psa.  xxxii.  i,  a.  *  Psa.  Ixxxiv.  9.


82         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

whom  alike  they  and  the  purified  worshippers  should  be
brought  near  to  God,  and  kept  in  fellowship  with  Him.
Yet  these  priests  themselves  continually  changed  ;  their  own
persons  and  services  needed  purification,  and  their  sacrifices
required  constant  renewal,  since,  in  the  nature  of  it,  such
substitution  could  not  be  perfect.  In  short,  all  this  was
symbolical  (of  man's  need,  God's  mercy,  and  His  covenant),
and  typical,  till  He  should  come  to  whom  it  all  pointed,  and
who  had  all  along  given  reality  to  it ;  He,  whose  Priesthood
was  perfect,  and  who  on  a  perfect  altar  brought  a  perfect
sacrifice,  once  for  all — a  perfect  Substitute,  and  a  perfect
Mediator.^

At  the  very  threshold  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation  stands
the  sacrifice  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  connected  with  the
redemption  of  Israel,  and  which  in  many  respects  must  be
regarded  as  typical,  or  rather  anticipatory,  of  all  the  others.
But  there  was  one  sacrifice  which,  even  under  the  Old  Testa-
ment, required  no  renewal.  It  was  when  God  had  entered
into  covenant  relationship  with  Israel,  and  Israel  became
the  "  people  of  God."  Then  Moses  sprinkled  *'  the  blood
of  the  covenant"  on  the  altar  and  on  the  people.^  On  the
ground  of  this  covenant-sacrifice  all  others  rested.^  These
were,  then,  either  sacrifices  of  communion  with  God,  or  else
intended  to  restore  that  communion  when  it  had  been  dis-
turbed or  dimmed  through  sin  and  trespass  :  sacrifices  in
communion,  or  for  comm.union  with  God.  To  the  former
class  belong  the  burnt-  and  the  peace-offerings  ;  to  the  latter,
the  sin-  and  the  trespass-offerings.  But,  as  without  the  shed-
ding o\  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin,  every  service  and
every  worshipper  had,  so  to  speak,  to  be  purified  by  blood,

*  Heb.  X.  1-24.  «  Ex.  xxiv.  »  Psa.  1.  5.


Sacrifices:  their  Order  and  their  Meaning.     83

and  the  mediatorial  agency  of  the  priesthood  called  in  to
bring  near  unto  God,  and  to  convey  the  assurance  of
acceptance.

The  readiest,  but  perhaps  the  most  superficial,  arrangement
of  sacrifices  is  into  bloody  and  unbloody.  The  latter,  or
"  Minchah,"  included,  besides  the  meat  and  drink  offering,
the  first  sheaf  at  the  Passover,  the  two  loaves  at  Pentecost,
and  the  shewbread.  The  meat-offering  was  only  brought
alone  in  two  instances — the  priest's  offering  ^  and  that  of
jealousy,^  to  which  Jewish  tradition  adds  the  meat-offerings
mentioned  in  Leviticus  ii.  If  in  Leviticus  v.  ii  a  meat-
offering is  allowed  in  cases  of  extreme  poverty  as  a  substi-
tute for  a  sin-offering,  this  only  further  proves  the  substitu-
tionary character  of  sacrifices.  From  all  this  it  will  be
evident  that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  meat-offering  cannot  be
regarded  as  separate  from  the  other  or  bloody  sacrifices.  In
proof  of  this,  it  always  varied  in  quantity,  according  to  the
kind  of  sacrifice  which  it  accompanied.^

The  general  requisites  of  all  sacrifices  were — that  they
should  be  brought  of  such  things,  in  such  place  and  manner,
and  through  such  mediatorial  agency,  as  God  had  appointed.
Thus  the  choice  and  the  appointment  of  the  mode  of  ap-
proaching Him,  were  to  be  all  of  God.  Then  it  was  a  first
principle  that  every  sacrifice  must  be  of  such  things  as  had
belonged  to  the  offerer.  None  other  could  represent  him  or
take  his  place  before  God.  Hence  the  Pharisees  were  right
when,  in  opposition  to  the  Sadducees,  they  carried  it  that
all  public  sacrifices  (which  were  offered  for  the  nation  as  a
whole)  should   be  purchased,  not   from   voluntary  contribu-

^  Lev.  vii.  12.  ^  Numb.  v.  15.

•  Numb.  XV.  I-I2i  xxviii.  1-12;  xxix.  ij  etfib


84         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

tions,  but  from  the  regular  temple  revenues.  Next,  all
animal  sacrifices  were  to  be  free  of  blemishes  (of  which  the
Rabbis  enumerate  seventy-three),  and  all  unbloody  offerings
to  be  without  admixture  of  leaven  or  of  honey  ;  the  latter
probably  because,  from  its  tendency  to  fermentation  or  corrup-
tion, it  resembled  leaven.  For  a  similar  reason  salt,  as  the
symbol  of  incorruption,  was  to  be  added  to  all  sacrifices.^
Hence  we  read  in  Mark  ix.  49 :  ''  For  every  one  shall  be
salted  with  fire,  and  every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted  with  salt  ;'*
that  is,  as  the  salt  is  added  to  the  sacrifice  symbolically
to  point  to  its  incorruption,  so  the  reality  and  permanence
of  our  Christian  lives  will  be  brought  out  by  the  fire  of  the
great  day,  when  what  is  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  shall  be
consumed  ;  while  that  which  is  real  shall  prove  itself  incorrup-
tible, having  had  the  fire  applied  to  it.

In  Scripture  three  kinds  of  four-footed  beasts — oxen,  sheep,
and  goats  ;  and  two  of  birds — turtle-doves  and  young  pigeons
— are  appointed  for  sacrifices.^  The  latter,  except  in  certain
purifications,  are  only  allowed  as  substitutes  for  other  sacri-
fices in  case  of  poverty.  Hence  also  no  direction  is  given
either  as  to  their  age  or  sex,  though  the  Rabbis  hold  that
the  turtle-doves  (which  were  the  common  birds  of  passage)
should  be  fully  grown,  and  the  domestic  pigeons  young
birds.  But,  as  in  the  various  sacrifices  of  oxen,  sheep,  and
goats  there  were  differences  of  age  and  sex,  the  Jews  enume-
rate twelve  sacrifices,  to  which  as  many  terms  in  Scripture
correspond.     The  Paschal  lamb   and  that  for   the   trespass-

*  The  Rabbis  speak  of  the  so-called  "salt  of  Sodom,"  probably  rock  salt  from
the  southern  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  as  used  in  the  sacrifices.

*  ''The  birds"  used  at  the  purification  of  the  leper  (Lev.  xiv.  4)  cannot  be
regaided  as  sacrificea.


Sandfices :  their  Order  and  their  Meaning.      85

offerings  required  to  be  males,  as  well  as  all  burnt-  and  all
public  sacrifices.  The  latter  '*  made  void  the  Sabbath  and
defilement/'  i.e,^  they  superseded  the  law  of  Sabbath  rest/
and  might  be  continued,  notwithstanding  one  kind  of  Leviti-
cal  defilement — that  by  death.

The  Rabbis,  who  are  very  fond  of  subtle  distinctions,  also
speak  of  public  sacrifices  that  resembled  the  private,^  and  of
private  sacrifices  that  resembled  the  public,  in  that  they  also
"made  void  the  Sabbath  and  defilement."^  Altogether  they
enumerate  eleven  public  sacrifices,  viz.,  the  daily  sacrifices  ;  the
additional  for  the  Sabbath  ;  for  the  New  Moon  ;  the  Passover
sacrifices  ;  the  lamb  when  the  sheaf  was  waved  ;  the  Pente-
costal sacrifices  ;  those  brought  with  the  two  first  loaves ;
New  Year's  ;  Atonement-day  sacrifices  ;  those  on  the  first
day  of,  and  those  on  the  octave  of  "  Tabernacles."  Private
sacrifices  they  classify  as  those  on  account  of  sins  by  word
or  deed  ;  those  on  account  of  what  concerned  the  body  (such
as  various  defilements)  ;  those  on  account  of  property  (first-
•  lings,  tithes)  ;  those  on  account  of  festive  seasons ;  and  those
on  account  of  vows  or  promises.  Yet  another  division  of
sacrifices  was  into  those  dtce,  or  prescribed,  and  those  volun-
tary. For  the  latter  nothing  could  be  used  that  had  pre-
viously been  vowed,  since  it  would  already  belong  unto  God.
But  of  far  greater  importance  is  the  arrangement  of  sacri-
fices into  the  most  holy  and  the  less  holy,  which  is  founded
on  Scripture.*     Certain  meat-offerings/  and  all  burnt-,  sin-,

*  Matt.  xii.  5.

*  When  the  congregation  had  sinned  through  ignorance  (Lev.  iv.  13 ;  Numb.
XV.  24-26).

*  The  Paschal  lamb,  and  the  high-priest's  bullock  for  a  sin-offering  and  ram
for  a  burnt-offering  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.

*  Lev.  vi.  17;    vii.  I ;    xiv.  13.  ^  Lev.  ii.  3,  10;   vi.  17;    x.  12.


80         The   Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

and  trespass-sacrifices,  as  well  as  all  public  peace-offerings,
were  most  holy.  Such  were  to  be  offered  or  sacrificed  in
one  of  the  more  holy  places  ;  they  were  slain  at  the  north
side  of  the  altar  ^  (the  less  holy  at  the  east  or  south  side) ;
and  they  were  either  not  partaken  of  at  all,  or  else  only  by
the  officiating  priests,  and  within  the  court  of  the  Temple.  The
skins  of  the  most  holy  sacrifices,  except  such  as  were  wholly
burnt,  belonged  to  the  priests ;  those  of  the  less  holy  to  the
offerers.  In  the  latter  case  they  also  partook  of  their  flesh,
the  only  exception  being  the  firstlings,  which  were  eaten
by  the  priests  alone.  The  Rabbis  attach  ten  comparative
degrees  of  sanctity  to  sacrifices  ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  mark
that  of  these  the  first  belonged  to  the  blood  of  the  sin-
offering  ;  the  second  to  the  burnt-offering ;  the  third  to  the
sin-offering  itself;  and  the  fourth  to  the  trespass-offering.
Lastly,  all  sacrifices  had  to  be  brought  before  actual  sunset,
although  the  unconsumed  flesh  might  smoulder  on  the  altar
till  next  dawn.

The  Rabbis  mention  the  following  five  acts  as  belonging
to  the  offerer  of  a  sacrifice  :  the  laying  on  of  hands,  slaying,
skinning,  cutting  up,  and  washing  the  inwards.  These  other
five  were  strictly  priestly  functions  :  Catching  up  the  blood,
sprinkling  it,  lighting  the  altar  fire,  laying  on  the  wood,
bringing  up  the  pieces,  and  all  else  done  at  the  altar  itself.

The  whole  service  must  have  been  exceedingly  solemn.
Having  first  been  duly  purified,  a  man  brought  his  sacrifice
himself  *' before  the  Lord  "—anciently,  to  "the  door  of  the
Tabernacle,"^  where  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  was,^  and  in

1  The  reason  of  this  is  obscure.  Was  it  that  the  north  was  regarded  as  the
Symbolical  region  of  cold  and  darkness  ?  Or,  was  it  because  during  the  wilder-
ness-journey the  Most  Holy  Place  probably  faced  north — towards  Palestine  ?

2  Lev.  i.  3 ;   iv.  4.  ^  ^x.  xl.  6.


Sacrifices:  thch^  Order  and  their  Meaning.      87

the  Temple  into  the  Great  Court.  If  the  sacrifice  was  most
holy,  he  entered  by  the  northern ;  if  less  holy,  by  the
southern  gate.  Next  he  placed  it  so  as  to  face  the  west,  or
the  Most  Holy  Place,  in  order  thus  literally  to  bring  it  before
the  Lord.  To  this  the  apostle  refers  when,  in  Romans  xii.  I,
he  beseecheth  us  to  present  our  "  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,
holy,  acceptable  unto  God."

But  this  was  only  the  commencement  of  the  service.
Women  might  bring  their  sacrifices  into  the  Great  Court ;
but  they  might  not  perform  the  second  rite^ — that  of  lay-
ing on  of  hands.  This  meant  transmission  and  delegation,
and  implied  representation  ;  so  that  it  really  pointed  to  the
substitution  of  the  sacrifice  for  the  sacrificer.  Hence  it  was
always  accompanied  by  confession  of  sin  and  prayer.  It
was  thus  done.  The  sacrifice  was  so  turned  that  the  person
confessing  looked  towards  the  west,  while  he  laid  his  hands
between  the  horns  of  the  sacrifice,^  and  if  the  sacrifice  was
brought  by  more  than  one,  each  had  to  lay  on  his  hands.  It
is  not  quite  a  settled  point  whether  one  or  both  hands  were
laid  on  ;  but  all  are  agreed  that  it  was  to  be  done  *'  with  one's
whole  force '' — as  it  were,  to  lay  one's  whole  weight  upon  the
substitute.^  If  a  person  under  vow  had  died,  his  heir-at-law
took  his  place.  The  only  public  sacrifices  in  which  hands
were  laid  on  were  those  for  sins  of  public  ignorance,*  when
the  "elders  "  acted  as  representing  the  people — to  which  some

^  There  is,  however,  one  dissentient  opinion  on  this  point.  See  Relandus,  AnU
p.  277.

2  If  the  offerer  stood  outside  the  Court  of  the  Priests,  on  the  topmost  of  the
fifteen  Levitical  steps,  or  within  the  gate  of  Nicanor,  his  hands  at  least  must  be
within  the  Great  Court,  or  the  rite  was  not  valid.

^  Children,  the  blind,  the  deaf,  those  out  of  their  mind,  and  non-Israelites,  were
not  allowed  to  *'lay  on  hands."  *  Lev.  iv.  15  ;    xvi.  21.


88         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Rabbinical  authorities  add  public  sin-offerings  in  general,' —
and  the  scapegoat  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  on  which  the
high-priest  laid  his  hands.  In  all  private  sacrifices,  except
firstlings,  tithes,  and  the  Paschal  lamb,  hands  were  laid  on,
and,  while  doing  so,  the  following  prayer  was  repeated  :  "  I
entreat,  O  Jehovah  :  I  have  sinned,  I  have  done  perversely,
I  have  rebelled,  I  have  committed  (naming  the  sin,  trespass,
or,  in  case  of  a  burnt-offering,  the  breach  of  positive  or
negative  command) ;  but  I  return  in  repentance,  and  let  this
be  for  my  atonement  (covering)."  According  to  Maimo-
nides,  in  peace-offerings  a  record  of  God's  praise,  rather  than
a  confession  of  sins,  was  spoken.  But,  as  the  principle  pre-
vailed that  frequent  confession  even  without  saciifice  was
meritorious,  another  formula  is  also  recorded,  in  which  the
allusion  to  sacrifices  is  omitted.

Closely  connected  with  this  was  "the  lifting  and  waving'*
of  certain  sacrifices.  The  priest  put  his  hands  under  those
of  the  offerer,  and  moved  the  sacrifice  upwards  and  down-
vvards,  right  and  left  ;  according  to  Abarbanel  also  ''  for^^ards
and  backwards."  The  lamb  of  the  leper's  trespass-offer-
ing  was  waved  before  it  was  slain ;  ^  private  peace-offer-
ings, only  after  they  had  been  slain  ;  while  in  public  peace-
offerings,  the  practice  varied.

Under  ordinary  circumstances  all  pubhc  sacrifices,  and
also  always  that  of  the  leper,  were  slain  by  the  priests.^
The  Talmud  declares  the  offering  of  birds,  so  as  to  secure
the  blood,*  to  have  been  the  most  difficult  part  of  a  priest's
work.     For  the   death  of  the   sacrifice   was   only   a    means

1  On  the  ground  of  2  Chron.  xxix.  23.  2  L^y^  ^iv,  24.

'^  The  Hebrew  term  used  for  sacrificial  slaying  is  never  applied  to  the  ordinary
Killing  of  animals.
*  In  the  case  of  birds  there  was  no  laying  on  of  hands.


Sacrifices .   tliAr  Order  and  their  Meaning.      89

towards  an  end,  that  end  being  the  shedding  and  sprinkling
of  the  blood,  by  which  the  atonement  was  really  made.
The  Rabbis  mention  a  variety  of  rules  observed  by  the
priest  who  caught  up  the  blood — all  designed  to  make  the
best  provision  for  its  proper  sprinkling.^  Thus  the  priest
was  to  catch  up  the  blood  in  a  silver  vessel  pointed  at  the
bottom,  so  that  it  could  not  be  put  down,  and  to  keep  it
constantly  stirred,  to  preserve  the  fluidity  of  the  blood.  In
the  sacrifice  of  the  red  heifer,  however,  the  priest  caught  the
blood  directly  in  his  left  hand,  and  sprinkled  it  with  his  right
towards  the  Holy  Place  :  while  in  that  of  the  leper  one  of  the
two  priests  received  the  blood  in  the  vessel ;  the  other  in  his
hand,  from  which  he  anointed  the  purified  leper .^

According  to  the  difference  of  sacrifices,  the  blood  was
differently  applied,  and  in  different  places.  In  all  burnt-,
trespass-,  and  peace-off"erings  the  blood  was  thrown  directly
out  of  the  vessel  or  vessels  in  which  it  had  been  caught,  the
priest  going  first  to  one  corner  of  the  altar  and  then  to  the
other,  and  throwing  it  in  the  form  of  the  Greek  letter  F,  so
that  each  time  two  sides  of  the  altar  were  covered.  Any
blood  left  after  these  two  "  gifts,"  as  they  were  called  (which
stood  for  four),  was  poured  out  at  the  base  of  the  altar,
whence  it  flowed  into  the  Kedron.  In  all  sin-ofi*erings  the
blood  was  not  thrown,  but  sprinkled,  the  priest  dipping  the
forefinger  of  his  right  hand  into  the  blood,  and  then  sprink-
ling it  from  his  finger  by  a  motion  of  the  thumb.  According
to  the  importance  of  the  sin-off*ering,  the  blood  was  so  applied
either  to  the  four  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  or  else
it  was  brought  into  the  Holy  Place  itself,  and  sprinkled  first

*  The  Rabbis  mention  five  mistakes  which  might  render  a  sacrifice  invalid,  none
of  them  the  least  interesting,  except,  perhaps,  that  the  guliet  might  never  be  wholly
severed.  *  Lev.  iv.  25.


90  The   Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

seven  times  towards  the  veil  of  the  Most  Holy  Place/  and
then  on  the  four  horns  of  the  golden  altar  of  incense,  be-
ginning at  the  north-east.  Finally,  on  the  Day  of  Atonement
the  blood  was  sprinkled  within  the  Most  Holy  Place  itself.
From  all  sin-offerings  the  blood  of  which  was  sprinkled  on  the
horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt-ofifering  certain  portions  were  to  be
eaten,  while  those  whose  blood  was  brought  into  the  Holy  Place
Itself  were  wholly  burnt.  But  in  the  sacrifices  of  firstlings,  of
tithes  of  animals,  and  of  the  Paschal  lamb,  the  blood  was
neither  thrown  nor  sprinkled,  and  only  poured  out  at  the  base
of  the  altar.

On  the  shedding  of  blood,  which  was  of  the  greatest  im-
portance— since,  according  to  the  Talmud,  '' whenever  the
blood  touches  the  altar  the  offerer  is  atoned  for  "^followed
the  "  flaying "  of  the  sacrifice  and  the  "  cutting  up  into  his
pieces."  All  this  had  to  be  done  in  an  orderly  manner,  and
according  to  certain  rules,  the  apostle  adopting  the  sacrificial
term  when  he  speaks  of  '*  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth."  ^
The  "  inwards  "  and  '*  legs  "  having  been  washed,^  and  dried
with  sponges,  the  separate  pieces  of  the  sacrifice  were  brought
up  by  various  priests  :  the  calculation  of  the  Rabbis  being,
that  in  the  case  of  a  sheep  or  a  she-goat  six  priests  carried  the
sacrifice,  one  more  the  meat-,  and  another  the  drink-offering
(in  all  eight)  ;  while  in  that  of  a  ram  twelve,  and  in  that  of  a
bullock  four-and-twenty  priests  were  needed  for  the  service.
Next,  the  sacrificial  salt  was  applied,  and  then  the  pieces  were
first  confusedly  thrown  and  then  arranged  upon  the  fire.*  This
latter  part  of  the  service  requires  explanation.     The  common

1  Lev.  iv.  6,  17.  2  2  Tim.  ii.  15.  ^  Lev.  i.  9.

*  Whatever  was  laid  upon  the  aUar  was  regarded  as  **  sanctified  "  by  it,  and
could  not  be  again  lemoved,  even  though  it  should  have  become  defiled.  This
explains  the  words  of  Christ  in  Matt,  xxiii.  19.


Sacrifices :  their  Order  and  their  Meaning.      91

idea  that  the  burning  either  of  part  or  the  whole  of  the  sacri-
fice pointed  to  its  destruction,  and  symbolised  the  wrath  of  God
and  the  punishment  due  to  sin,  does  not  seem  to  accord
with  the  statements  of  Scripture.  The  term  used  is  not  that
commonly  employed  for  burning,  but  means  ''causing  to
smoke,"  and  the  rite  symbolises  partly  the  entire  surrender
of  the  sacrifice,  but  chiefly  its  acceptance  on  the  part  of  God.
Thus  the  sacrifice  consumed  by  a  fire  which  had  originally
come  down  from  God  Himself — not  by  strange  fire — would
ascend  "  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  ^  Even  the  cir-
cumstance that  the  fire  for  the  altar  of  incense  was  always
taken  from  that  on  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  shows  that,
while  that  fire  might  symbolise  the  presence  of  a  holy  Jehovah
in  His  house,  it  could  not  refer  to  the  fire  of  wrath  or  of
punishment.^  As  already  stated,  those  parts  of  the  sin-,
trespass-,^  and  public  peace-offerings,  which  were  allowed  to
be  eaten,  could  only  be  partaken  of  by  the  priests  (not  their
families)  during  their  actual  ministry,  and  within  the  Temple
walls.  The  flesh  of  these  off"erings  had  also  to  be  eaten  on
the  day  of  the  sacrifice,  or  in  the  night  following  ;  while  in
other  off*erings  the  permission  extended  to  a  second  day.
The  Rabbis,  however,  restrict  the  eating  of  the  Paschal  lamb
to  midnight.  Whatever  was  left  beyond  the  lawful  time  had
to  be  burned.

It  is  deeply  interesting  to  know  that  the  New  Testament
view  of  sacrifices  is  entirely  in  accordance  with  that  of  the

'  Lev.  i.  9;  iv.  31.

2  Compare  the  article  in  Herzog's  Encyc,  vol.  x.  p.  633.  Some  of  the  sacrifices
were  burned  on  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  and  some  outside  the  gate;  while  in  certain
less  holy  sacrifices  it  was  allowed  to  bum  what  was  left  anywhere  within  the  city.

3  Except  those  for  the  whole  people  and  for  the  high-priest,  which  had  to  be
burned  outside  the  gate.


92         The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services^

ancient  Synagogue.  At  the  threshold  we  here  meet  the
principle :  ''  There  is  no  atonement  except  by  blood."  In
accordance  with  this  we  quote  the  following  from  Jewish
interpreters.  Rashi  says  :^  '^The  soul  of  every  creature  is
bound  up  in  its  blood ;  therefore  I  gave  it  to  atone  for  the
soul  of  man — that  one  soul  should  come  and  atone  for  the
other."  Similarly  Aben  Ezra  writes :  "  One  soul  is  a  sub-
stitute for  the  other."  And  Moses  ben  Nachmann  :  *'  I  gave
the  soul  for  you  on  the  altar,  that  the  soul  of  the  animal
should  be  an  atonement  for  the  soul  of  the  man."  These
quotations  might  be  almost  indefinitely  multiplied.  Another
phase  of  scriptural  truth  appears  in  such  Rabbinical  state
ments  as  that  by  the  imposition  of  hands  :  "  The  offerer,  as  it
were,  puts  away  his  sins  from  himself,  and  transfers  them
upon  the  living  animal ;"  and  that,  *'  as  often  as  any  one  sins
with  his  soul,  whether  from  haste  or  malice,  he  puts  away  his
sin  from  himself,  and  places  it  upon  the  head  of  his  sacrifice,
and  it  is  an  atonement  for  him."  Hence,  also,  the  principle
laid  down  by  Abarbanel,  that,  *'  after  the  prayer  of  confession
(connected  with  the  imposition  of  hands)  the  sins  of  the
children  of  Israel  lay  on  the  sacrifice  (of  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment)." This,  according  to  Maimonides,  explains  why  every
one  who  had  anything  to  do  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  red
heifer  or  the  goat  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  or  similar
offerings,  was  rendered  unclean  ;  since  these  animals  were  re-
garded as  actually  sin-bearing.  In  fact,  according  to  Rabbi-
nical expression,  the  sin-bearing  animal  is  on  that  ground
expressly  designated  as  something  to  be  rejected  and  abomi-
nable. The  Christian  reader  will  here  be  reminded  of  the
scriptural   statement:    "For  He  has   made  Him  to    be  sin

\  On  Lev.  xvii.  i  x«


Sacrifices:  their  Order  and  their  Meaning.      93

for   us  who   knew   no    sin,   that    we    might    be    made    the
righteousness  of  God  in  Him."

There  is  yet  one  other  phase  on  which  the  Synagogue  lays
stress.  It  is  best  expressed  in  the  following  quotation,  to
which  many  similar  might  be  added  :  *'  Properly  speaking,
the  blood  of  the  sinner  should  have  been  shed,  and  his  body
burned,  as  those  of  the  sacrifices.  But  the  Holy  One — blessed
be  He  ! — accepted  our  sacrifice  from  us  as  redemption  and
atonement.  Behold  the  full  grace  which  Jehovah — blessed
be  He  ! — has  shown  to  man  !  In  His  compassion  and  in  the
fulness  of  His  grace  He  accepted  the  soul  of  the  animal
instead  of  his  soul,  that  through  it  there  might  be  an  atone-
ment.*'  Hence  also  the  principle,  so  important  as  an  answer
to  the  question,  Whether  tlje  Israelites  of  old  had  understood
the  meaning  of  sacrifices }  "  He  that  brought  a  sacrifice  re-
quired to  come  to  the  knowledge  that  that  sacrifice  was  his
redemption."^

In  view  of  all  this,  the  deep-felt  want  so  often  expressed  by
the  Synagogue  is  most  touching.  In  the  liturgy  for  the  Day
of  Atonement  we  read  :  **  While  the  altar  and  the  sanctuary
were  still  in  their  places,  we  were  atoned  for  by  the  goats,
designated  by  lot.  But  now  for  our  guilt,  if  Jehovah  be
pleased  to  destroy  us,  He  takes  from  our  hand  neither  burnt-
offering  nor  sacrifice."  We  add  only  one  more  out  of  many
similar  passages  in  the  Jewish  prayer-book  :  "  We  have  spoken
violence  and  rebellion  ;  we  have  walked  in  a  way  that  is  not
right.  .  .  .  Behold,  our  transgressions  have  increased  upon  us ;
they  press  upon  us  like  a  -burden  ;  they  have  gone  over  our
heads  ;  we  have    forsaken    Thy   commandments,  which   are

^  David  de  Pomis.     On  the  whole  subject  see  Wlinsche^s  interesting  tractate,
Zfe  lAiden  des  Messias,  where  the  quotations  are  given  ftt  length.


94         The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

excellent.  And  wherewith  shall  we  appear  before  Thee,  the
mighty  God,  to  atone  for  our  transgressions,  and  to  put  away
our  trespasses,  and  to  remove  sin,  and  to  magnify  Thy
grace  ?  Sacrifices  and  offerings  are  no  more  ;  sin-  and  trespass-
offerings  have  ceased ;  the  blood  of  sacrifices  is  no  longer
sprinkled  ;  destroyed  is  Thy  holy  house,  and  fallen  the  gates
of  Thy  sanctuary ;  Thy  holy  city  lies  desolate  ;  Thou  hast
slain,  sent  from  Thy  presence ;  they  have  gone,  driven  forth
from  before  Thy  face,  the  priests  who  brought  Thy  sacrifices  !"
Accordingly,  also,  the  petition  frequently  recurs :  "  Raise  up
for  us  a  right  Intercessor  (that  it  may  be  true),  I  have  found
a  ransom  (an  atonement,  or  covering)/'  And  on  the  Day  of
Atonement,  as  in  substance  frequently  on  other  occasions,
they  pray:  **  Bring  us  back  in  jubilee  to  Zion,  Thy  city,  and  in
joy  as  of  old  to  Jerusalem,  the  house  of  Thy  holiness  !  Then
shall  we  bring  before  Thy  face  the  sacrifices  that  are  due.'*

Who  shall  make  answer  to  this  deep  lament  of  exiled
Judah  ?  Where  shall  a  ransom  be  found  to  take  the  place
of  their  sacrifices  ?  In  their  despair  some  appeal  to  the
merits  of  the  fathers  or  of  the  pious  ;  others  to  their  own  or  to
Israel's  sufferings,  or  to  death,  which  is  regarded  as  the  last
expiation.  But  the  most  melancholy  exhibition,  perhaps,  is
that  of  an  attempted  sacrifice  by  each  pious  Israelite  on  the
eve  of  the  Day  of  Atonement.  Taking  for  males  a  white
cock,^  and  for  females  a  hen,  the  head  of  the  house  prays:
"  The  children  of  men  who  dwell  in  darkness  and  in  the
shadow  of  death,  bound  in  misery  and  iron — them  will  He
bring  forth  from  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,  and
break   their  bonds  asunder.     Fools,  because  of  their  trans-

1  Because  the  Hebrew  word  for  '*man''  (Gever)  is  used  in  the  Talmud  for
"a  cock,"  and  "white,"  with  reference  to  Isa.  i.  l8.


Sacrifices :  their  Order  and  their  Meaning.      95

gressions  and  because  of  their  iniquities,  are  afflicted  ;  their
soul  abhorreth  all  manner  of  meat,  and  they  draw  near  unto
the  gates  of  death.  Then  they  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their
trouble,  that  He  save  them  out  of  their  distresses.  He  sends
His  word  and  heals  them,  and  delivers  them  from  their
destruction.  Then  they  praise  the  Lord  for  His  goodness,
and  for  His  marvellous  works  to  the  children  of  men.  If
there  be  an  angel  with  Him,  an  intercessor,  one  among  a
thousand,  to  show  unto  men  his  righteousness,  then  He  is
gracious  unto  him,  and  saith.  Let  him  go,  that  he  may  not
go  down  into  the  pit ;  I  have  found  an  atonement  (a  cover-
ing)." Next,  the  head  of  the  house  swings  the  sacrifice  round
his  head,  saying,  "  This  is  my  substitute ;  this  is  in  exchange
for  me ;  this  is  my  atonement.  This  cock  goes  into  death,
but  may  I  enter  into  a  long  and  happy  life,  and  into  peace  !*'
Then  he  repeats  this  prayer  three  times,  and  lays  his  hands
on  the  sacrifice  which  is  now  slain.

This  offering  up  of  an  animal  not  sanctioned  by  the  law,  in
a  place,  in  a  manner,  and  by  hands  not  authorised  by  God,
is  it  not  a  terrible  phantom  of  Israel's  dark  and  dreary  night  1
and  does  it  not  seem  strangely  to  remind  us  of  that  other
terrible  night,  when  the  threefold  crowing  of  a  cock  awakened
Peter  to  the  fact  of  his  denial  of  "  the  Lamb  of  God  which
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  V^

And  still  the  cry  of  the  Synagogue  comes  to  us  through

these  many  centuries  of  past  unbelief  and  ignorance :  "  Let

one  innocent  come  and  make  atonement  for  the  guilty  !"    To

which  no  other  response  can  ever  be  made  than  that  of  the

apostle:    "Such   an    High-Priest   became   us,   who   is   holy,

harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners,  and  made  higher

than  the  heavens  !"^

^  Heb.  vii.  26*


CHAPTER   VI.

THE  BURNT-OFFERING,    THE   SIN-  AND  TRESPASS-OFFERING,
AND  THE  PEACE-OFFERING.

**  And  every  priest  standeth  daily  ministering  and  offering  oftentimes  the  same
sacrifices,  which  can  never  take  away  sins :  but  this  Man,  after  He  had
offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God." —
Heb.  X.   II,  12.

THE  question  whether  or  not  sacrifices  were  to  cease  after
the  coming  of  the  Messiah  is  differently  answered  in  the
Jewish  synagogue,  some  arguing  that  only  thank-  and  peace-
offerings  would  then  be  brought,  while  the  majority  expect  a
revival  of  the  regular  sacrificial  worship.^  But  on  one  point
the  authorities  of  the  old  synagogue,  previous  to  their  contro-
versy with  Christianity,  are  agreed.  As  the  Old  Testament
and  Jewish  tradition  taught  that  the  object  of  a  sacrifice  was
its  sicbstitittion  for  the  offender,  so  Scripture  and  the  Jewish
fathers  also  teach  that  the  substitute  to  whom  all  these  types
pointed  was  none  other  than  the  Messiah.

It  has  been  well  remarked,^  that  the  difficulties  of  modern
interpreters  of  the  Messianic  prophecies  arise  chiefly  from  their
not  perceiving  the  unity  of  the  Old  Testament  in  its  progres-
sive unfolding  of  the  plan  of  salvation.     Moses  must  not  be

^  See  WUnsche,  «.j.,  p.  28.  It  has  been  matter  of  controversy  whether  or  not,
in  the  first  years  after  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  solitary  attempts  were  made
by  enthusiasts  to  offer  sacrifices.  My  own  conviction  is,  that  no  such  instance
can  be  historically  established.  See  Derenbourg,  Essai  sur  V Hist,  de  la  FaL,
pp.  480-482.  *  Wiinsche,  p.  35.


Burnt ^  Siuy   Trespass,  and  Peace- Offerings.      97

read  independently  of  the  Psalms,  nor  yet  the  Psalms  inde-
pendently of  the  Prophets.  Theirs  are  not  so  many  uncon-
nected writings  of  different  authorship  and  age,  only  held
together  by  the  boards  of  one  volume.  They  form  integral
parts  of  one  whole,  the  object  of  which  is  to  point  to  the
goal  of  all  revelation  in  the  appearing  of  the  Christ.  Ac-
cordingly, we  recognise  in  the  prophetic  word,  not  a  change
nor  a  difference,  but  three  well-marked  progressive  stages,
leading  up  to  the  sufferings  and  the  glory  of  Messiah.  In
the  Proto-Evangel,  as  Genesis  iii.  15  has  been  called,  and  in
what  follows  it,  we  have  as  yet  only  the  grand  general  out-
lines of  the  figure.  Thus  we  see  a  Person  in  the  Seed  of  the
woman  ;  suffering,  in  the  prediction  that  His  heel  would  be
bruised  ;  and  victory ^  in  that  He  would  bruise  the  serpent's
head.  These  merely  general  outlines  are  wonderfully  filled
up  in  the  Book  of  Psalms.  The  ^'  Person  "  is  now  "  the  Son
of  David ; "  while  alike  the  sufferings  and  the  victory  are
sketched  in  vivid  detail  in  such  Psalms  as  xxii.,  xxxv.,
Ixix.,  and  cii. ;  or  else  in  Psalms  ii.,  Ixxii.,  Ixxxix.,  ex.,  and
cxviii. — not  to  speak  of  other  almost  innumerable  allusions.

One  element  only  was  still  wanting — that  this  Son  of
David,  this  Sufferer  and  Conqueror,  should  be  shown  to  be
our  Substitute y  to  whom  also  the  sacrificial  types  had  pointed.
This  is  added  in  the  writings  of  the  prophets,  especially
in  those  of  Isaiah,  culminating,  as  it  were,  in  Isaiah  liii.,
around  which  the  details  furnished  by  the  other  prophets
naturally  group  themselves.*  The  picture  is  now  completed,
and  so  true  to  the  original  that,  when  compared  with  the
reality  in  the  Person  and  Work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we
can  have  no  difficulty  in  recognising  it ;  and  this  not  so  much
from   one   or   other  outline   in  prophecy   or   type,    as    from

H


98  The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services^

their  combination  and  progressive  development  throughout
the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  considered  as  a  con-
nected whole.

As  already  stated,  such  early  works  as  the  "Targum
Jonathan"  and  the  "Jerusalem  Targum"^  frankly  adopt
the  Messianic  interpretation  of  these  prophecies.  The  later
Rabbis  also  admit  that  this  had  been  the  common  view  of  the
Jewish  fathers ;  but,  on  account  of  "  the  sages  of  the  Naza-
renes,  who  apply  it  to  that  man  whom  they  hanged  in  Jeru-
salem towards  the  close  of  the  Second  Temple,  and  who,
according  to  their  opinion,  was  the  Son  of  the  Most  Blessed,
and  had  taken  human  nature  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin,"
they  reject  that  interpretation,  and  refer  the  prediction  of
suffering  either  to  some  individual,  or  mostly  to  Israel  as  a
nation.  But  so  difficult  is  it  to  weaken  the  language  in  which
the  Messiah's  vicarious  sufferings  are  described — not  less  than
twelve  times  in  Isaiah  lii.  13  to  liii. — that  some  of  their  com-
mentators have  been  forced  to  admit  it,  sometimes  almost
unconsciously.  The  language  of  Isaiah  has  even  crept
into  the  following  Messianic  hymnal  prayer  for  the  Pass-
over :* —

**  Haste,  my  Beloved ;  come,  ere  ends  the  vision's  day ;
Make  haste,  and  chase  Thyself  the  shadows  all  away  I
•  Despised '  is  He,  but  yet  *  extolled '  and  *  high  *  shall  be ;
'Deal  prudently,'  'sprinkle  nations,*  and  *  judge'  shall  He.*

Thus,  if  by  the  universal  consent  of  all  who  are  unprejudiced

*  Whatever  date  may  be  assigned  to  these  'jTargumin^  in  ^€\x  present  recension,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  embody  the  elements  of  the  very  earliest  Jewish
Biblical  interpretation.  For  particulars  I  must  take  leave  to  refer  to  my  History
of  the  Jewish  Nation^  chap.  xi.  :  Theological  Science  and  Religious  Belief  in  Pales-
tine, p.  407,  etc.

2  According  to  the  English  edition  of  David  Levi,  this  prayer  applies  to  **the
true  Messiah.''     See  Wiinsche,  p.  28,  etc


Burnt,  Silt,    Trespass,  and  Peace- Offerings.      99

sacrifices  point  to  substitution,  substitution  in  its  turn  points
to  the  Person  and  Work  of  the  Messiah.

It  has  already  been  explained  that  all  sacrifices  were
either  such  as  were  offered  on  the  ground  of  communion  with
God — the  burnt-  and  the  peace-offering  ;  or  else  such  as  were
intended  to  restore  that  communion  when  it  had  been  dimmed
or  disturbed — the  sin-  and  the  trespass-offering.  Each  of
these  four  kinds  of  sacrifices  will  now  have  to  be  separately
considered.

I.  The  burnt-offering — Olah,  or  also  Chalil} — The  deriva-
tion of  the  term  Olah,  as  wholly  ** ascending"  unto  God,
indicates  alike  the  mode  of  the  sacrifice  and  its  meaning.  It
symbolised  the  entire  surrender  unto  God,  whether  of  the
individual  or  of  the  congregation,  and  His  acceptance  thereof.
Hence,  also,  it  could  not  be  offered  "without  shedding  of
blood.''  Where  other  sacrifices  were  brought,  it  followed  the
sin-  but  preceded  the  peace-offering.  In  fact,  it  meant  general
acceptance  on  the  ground  of  previous  special  acceptance,  and
it  has  rightly  been  called  the  sacrificium  latreuticum,  or  sacri-
fice of  devotion  and  service.^  Thus  day  by  day  it  formed  the
regular  morning  and  evening  service  in  the  Temple,  while  on
sabbaths,  new  moons,  and  festivals  additional  burnt-offerings
followed  the  ordinary  worship.  There  the  covenant-people
brought  the  covenant-sacrifice,  and  the  multitude  of  offerings
indicated,  as  it  were,  the  fulness,  richness,  and  joyousness  of
their  self-surrender.  Accordingly,  although  we  can  under-
stand how  this  sacrifice  niight  be  said  to  "  make  atonement "
for  an  individual  in  the  sense  of  assuring  him  of  his  accept-
ance, we  cannot  agree  with  the  Rabbis  that  it  was  intended

^  Deut.  xxxiii.  lo :   in  Psa,  li.  19  literally  rendered  **  whole  burnt-offering."
2  In  the  historical  hooks  the  term  Olah  is,   however,   used  in  a  more  general
sense  to  denote  other  sacrifices  also.


lOO       The  Temple y  its  Ministry  and  Services.

to  atone  for  evil  thoughts  and  purposes,  and  for  breaches  of
positive  commands,  or  of  such  negative  as  involved  also  a
positive  com.mand.

The  burnt-offering  was  always  to  be  a  male  animal,  as  the
more  noble,  and  as  indicating  strength  and  energy.  The  blood
"vas  thrown  on  the  angles  of  the  altar  below  the  red  line  that
ran  round  it.  Then  *'  the  sinew  of  the  thigh,"  ^  the  stomach
and  the  entrails,  etc.,  having  been  removed  (in  the  case  of
birds  also  the  feathers  and  the  wings),  and  the  sacrifice
having  been  duly  salted,  it  was  wholly  burned.  The  skins
belonged  to  the  ministering  priests,  who  derived  a  consider-
able revenue  from  this  source.^  The  burnt-offering  was  the
only  sacrifice  which  non-Israelites  were  allowed  to  bring.^
The  Emperor  Augustus  had  a  daily  burnt-offering  brought
for  him  of  two  lambs  and  a  bullock  ;  and  ever  afterwards
this  sacrifice  was  regarded  as  indicating  that  the  Jewish
nation  recognised  the  Roman  emperor  as  their  ruler.  Hence
at  the  commencement  of  the  Jewish  war  Eleazar  carried  its
rejection,  and  this  becar^e,  as  it  were,  the  open  mark  of  the
rebellion.

11.  The  Sin-offering. — This  is  the  most  important  of  all
sacrifices.  It  made  atonement  for  the  person  of  the  offender,
whereas  the  trespass-offering  only  atoned  for  one  special
offence.  Hence  sin-offerings  were  brought  on  festive  occa-
sions for  the  whole  people,  but  never  trespass-offerings."*     In

^  Gen.  xxxid.  32.  The  ** sinew  of  the  thigh"  was  neither  allowed  to  be  eaten
nor  to  be  sacrificed.

2  Philo,  De  Sacerd.  honor.,  p.  833.

3  If  they  brought  a  **  peace-offering,"  it  was  to  be  treated  as  a  bumt-ofFeiing,
and  that  for  the  obvious  reason  that  there  was  no  one  to  eat  the  sacrificial  meaL
Of  course,  there  was  no  imposition  of  hands  in  that  case.

*  Comp.  Numb,  xxviii.,  xxix.


Burnt ^  Sin,   Trespass ^  and  Peace- Offerings.     loi

fact,  the  trespass-offering  may  be  regarded  as  representing
ransom  for  a  special  wrong,  while  the  sin-offering  symbolised
general  redemption.  Both  sacrifices  applied  only  to  sins
"  through  ignorance,"  in  opposition  to  those  done  '*  pre-
sumptuously" (or  ''with  a  high  hand").  For  the  latter  the
law  provided  no  atonement,  but  held  out  "  a  certain  fearful
looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation."  By  sin.^
"through  ignorance,"  however,  we  are  to  understand,  ac-
cording to  the  Rabbis,  not  only  such  as  were  committed
strictly  through  want  of  knowledge,  but  also  those  which  had
been  unintentional,  or  through  weakness,  or  where  the  offender
at  the  time  realised  not  his  guilt  The  fundamental  difference
between  the  two  sacrifices  appears  also  in  this — that  sin-
offerings,  having  a  retrospective  effect  on  the  worshippers,
were  brought  at  the  various  festivals,  and  also  for  purification
in  such  defilements  of  the  body  as  symbolically  pointed  to
the  sinfulness  of  our  nature  (sexual  defilement,  those  con-
nected with  leprosy,  and  with  death).^  On  the  other  hand,
the  animal  brought  for  a  trespass-offering  was  to  be  always  a
male  (generally  a  ram,  which  was  never  used  as  a  sin-offering);
nor  was  it  lawful,  as  in  the  sin-offering,  to  make  substitution
of  something  else  in  case  of  poverty.  These  two  particulars
indicate  that  the  trespass-offering  contemplated  chiefly  a
wrong,  for  which  decided  satisfaction  was  to  be  made  by
offering  a  male  animal,  and  for  which  a  definite,  unvarying
ransom  was  to  be  given.^

^  Oehler  (in  Herzog's  Encycl.  x.  p.  643)  applies  the  section  Lev.  v.  I-13  to
sin-offerings^  the  word  ** trespass"  being  taken  in  a  general  sense.  The  distinction
between  them  and  the  ordinary  trespass-offerings  appears  from  verse  14,  etc.

*  On  the  trespass-offering  of  the  leper  (Lev.  xiv.  12),  and  of  the  Nazarite  whose
vow  had  been  interrupted  (Numb.  vi.  12),  see  below.


I02       Tlie  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

JHowever,  in  reference  both  to  sin-  and  to  trespass-offerings,
the  Rabbinical  principle  must  be  kept  in  view — that  they  only
atoned  in  case  of  real  repentance.  Indeed,  their  first  effect
would  be  *'a  remembrance  of  sins"  before  God.^  All  sin-
offerings  were  either  public  or  private  (congregational  or
individual).  The  former  were  always  males;  the  latter
always  females,  except  the  bullock  for  the  high-priest's  sin
of  ignorance,^  and  the  kid  for  the  same  offence  of  a  "  ruler." ^
They  were  further  divided  into  fixedy  which  were  the  same  in
the  case  of  rich  and  poor,  and  varying,  which  "  ascended  and
descended"  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  offerer.
**  Fixed  "sacrifices  were  all  those  for  sins  "through  ignorance"
against  any  of  the  prohibitory  commands  (of  which  the  Rabbis
enumerate  365);*  for  sins  of  deed,  not  of  word;  or  else  for
such  which,  if  they  had  been  high-handed,  would  have  carried
the  Divine  punishment  of  being  "cut  off"  (of  which  the  Rabbis
enumerate  36).  The  "varying"  sacrifices  were  those  for
lepers  f  for  women  after  childbirth  (of  which  concession  to
poverty  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  availed  herself);^  for
having  concealed  a  "thing  known ";7  for  having  unwittingly
sworn  falsely  ;  and  for  having  either  unwittingly  eaten  of
what  had  been  consecrated,  or  gone  into  the  Temple  in  a  state
of  defilement.  Lastly,  there  were  "  outer  "  and  "  inner  "  sin-
offerings,  according  as  the  blood  was  applied  to  the  altar  of
burnt-offering  or  brought  into  the  inner  sanctuary.  In  the
former  case  the  flesh  was  to  be  eaten  only  by  the  officiating
priests  and  within  the  sanctuary ;  the  latter  were  to  be  wholly

1  Heb.  X.  3.  «  Lev.  iv.  3.  '  Lev.  iv.  22.

*  They  also  mention  248  affirmative  precepts,  or  in  all  613,  according  to  the
supposed  number  of  members  in  the  human  body;
^  Lev.  xiv.  21.  ®  Luke  ii.  24;  Lev.  xii.  8.  '  Lev.  v.  i.


Burnt y  Sin,   Trespass,  and  Peace- Offerings.     103

burnt  without  the  camp  or  city.^  In  both  cases,  however,  the
^'inwards/*  as  ©numerated  in  Leviticus  iv.  8,  were  always
first  burned  on  the  altar  of  burnt-ofifering.  Neither  oil  nor
frankincense  were  to  be  brought  with  a  sin-offering.  There  was
nothing  joyous  about  it  It  represented  a  terrible  necessity,
for  which  God,  in  His  wondrous  grace,  had  made  provision.

It  only  remains  to  explain  in  detail  two  peculiarities  con-
nected with  the  sin-offering.  First,  it  differed  according  to  the
theocratic  position  of  him  who  brought  the  sacrifice.  For  the
high-priest  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,^  or  when  he  had  sinned,
*'to  the  rendering  guilty  of  the  people,"^  that  is,  in  his  official
capacity  as  representing  the  people ;  or  if  the  whole  congre-
gation had  sinned  through  ignorance  ;*  and  at  the  consecration
of  the  priests  and  Levites  a  bullock  was  to  be  brought.  This
was  the  highest  kind  of  sin-offering.  Next  in  order  was  that
of  the  "  kid  of  the  goats,"  offered  for  the  people  on  the  Day
of  Atonement,^  and  on  the  other  festivals  and  New  Moons  f
also  for  the  ruler  who  had  sinned  through  ignorance  \f  for  the
congregation  if  aught  had  been  committed  by  any  individual
**  without  the  knowledge  of  the  congregation;"^  and,  lastly,  at
the  consecration  of  the  Tabernacle.^  The  third  kind  of  sin-
offering  consisted  of  a  female  kid  of  the  goats^®  for  individual


1  According  to  the  Talmud,  if  floves  were  brought  as  a  sin-offering,  the  carcases
were  not  burned,  but  went  to  the  priests.

*  Lev.  xvi.  3.  ^  Lev.  iv.  3.

*  Lev.  iv.  13.  The  Rabbis  apply  this  to  erroneous  decisions  on  the  part  of  the
Sanhedrim.

^  Lev.  xvi.  5.  *  Numb,  xxviii.  15,  etc.  ;  xxix.  5,  etc.

'  Lev.  iv.  23.  ®  Numb.  xv.  24,  ^  Lev.  ix.  3,  15.

*°  It  is  not  very  easy  to  understand  why  goats  should  have  been  chosen  in
preference  for  sin-offerings,  unless  it  were  that  their  flesh  was  the  most  unpalatable
of  meat.


I04       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Israelites,^  and  of  a  ewe  lamb  for  a  Nazarite^  and  a  leper.*
The  lowest  grade  of  sin-offering  was  that  of  turtle-doves  or
young  pigeons  offered  at  certain  purifications  ;*  or  else  as  a
substitute  for  other  sacrifices  in  case  of  poverty — in  extreme
cases  something  resembling  to,  or  "  as  a  meat-offering  "  being
even  allowed.^

Secondly^  the  blood  of  the  sin-offering  was  sprinkled,  not
thrown.  In  the  case  of  a  private  Israelite,  it  was  sprinkled,
that  is,  either  jerked  or  dropped  successively  on  each  of  the
four  horns®  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering — beginning  at  the
south-east,  thence  going  to  the  north-east,  then  the  north-
west, and  finishing  at  the  south-west,  where  the  rest  of  the
blood  was  poured  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  through  two
funnels  that  conducted  into  the  Kedron.  On  the  other  hand,
when  offering  bullocks  and  goats,  whose  carcases  were  to  be
burned  without  the  camp,  the  officiating  priest  stood  in  the
Holy  Place,  between  the  golden  altar  and  the  candlestick,  and
sprinkled  of  the  blood  seven  times'^  towards  the  Most  Holy
Place,  to  indicate  that  the  covenant-relationship  itself  had
been  endangered  and  was  to  be  re-established,  and  afterwards
touched  with  it  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  incense.  The  most
solemn  of  all  sacrifices  were  those  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,
when  the  high-priest,  arrayed  in  his  linen  garments,  stood
before  the  Lord  Himself  within  the  Most  Holy  Place  to  make
an  atonement.  Every  spot  of  blood  from  a  sin-offering  on  a
garment  conveyed  defilement,  as  being  loaded  with  sin,  and
all  vessels  used  for  such  sacrifices  had  either  to  be  broken  or
scoured.

1  Lev.  iv.  28,  etc.  5  v.  6.  •  Numb,  vi,  14.  •  Lev.  xiv.  10.

*  Lev.  xii.  6;  xv.  14,  29;  Numb,  vi,  10.  •  Lev.  v.  11-13.

®  The  *  *  horns  "  symbolised,  as  it  were,  the  outstanding  height  and  strength  of
tlie  altar,  '  Seven  was  the  symbolical  number  of  the  covenant.


Burnt y  Sin,   Trespass,  and  Peace- Offerings,      105

Quite  another  phase  of  symbolic  meaning  was  intended  to
be  conveyed  by  the  sacrificial  meal  which  the  priests  were  to
make  of  the  flesh  of  such  sin-ofiferings  as  were  not  wholly
burnt  without  the  camp.  Unquestionably  Philo^  was  right  in
suggesting,  that  one  of  the  main  objects  of  this  meal  was  to
carry  to  the  offerer  assurance  of  his  acceptance,  "  since  God
would  never  have  allowed  His  servants  to  partake  of  it,  had
there  not  been  a  complete  removal  and  forgetting  of  the  sin  "
atoned  for.  This  view  entirely  accords  with  the  statement  in
Lev.  X.  17,  where  the  purpose  of  this  meal  by  the  priests  is
said  to  be  "to  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  congregation."  Hence,
also,  the  flesh  of  all  sacrifices,  either  for  the  high-priest,  as
representing  the  priesthood,  or  for  the  whole  people,  had  to
be  burnt ;  because  those  who,  as  God's  representatives,  were
alone  allowed  to  eat  the  sacrificial  meal  were  themselves
among  the  offerers  of  the  sacrifice.

in.  The  trespass-offering  was  provided  for  certain  trans-
gressions committed  through  ignorance,  or  else,  according  to
Jewish  tradition,  where  a  man  afterwards  voluntarily  con-
fessed himself  guilty.  The  Rabbis  arrange  this  class  into
those  for  a  doubtful  and  for  a  certain  trespass.  The  former
were  offered  by  the  more  scrupulous,  when,  uncertain  whether
they  might  not  have  committed  an  offence  which,  if  done  high-
handed, would  have  implied  being  "  cut  off",'*  or,  if  in  ignorance,
necessitated  a  sin-offering.  Accordingly,  the  extreme  party,  or
Chassidim,  were  wont  to  bring  such  a  sacrifice  every  day !
On  the  other  hand,  the  offering  for  certain  trespasses  covered
five  distinct  cases,^  which  had  all  this  in  common,  that  they

*  De  Vict,  13.

«  Lev.  V.  15  ;  vi.  2  ;  xix.  20  (in  these  three  cases  the  offering  was  a  ram) ;  and
Lev.  xiv.  12,  and  Numb.  vi.  12  (where  the  offering  was  a  he-lamb).    The  Word  of


io6       The   Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

represented  a  wrong  for  which  a  special  ransom  was  to  be
given.  It  forms  no  exception  to  this  principle,  that  a  trespass-
offering  was  also  prescribed  in  the  case  of  a  healed  leper,^  and
in  that  of  a  Nazarite,  whose  vow  had  been  interrupted  by-
sudden  defilement  with  the  dead,^  since  leprosy  was  also
symbolically  regarded  as  a  wrong  to  the  congregation  as  a
whole,^  while  the  interruption  of  the  vow  was  a  kind  of  wrong
directly  towards  the  Lord.  But  that  this  last  was,  at  the
same  tirne,  considered  the  lightest  kind  of  trespass  appears
even  from  this— that,  while  ordinarily  the  flesh  of  the  trespass-
offering,  after  burning  the  inwards  on  the  altar  of  burnt-
offering,^  was  only  to  be  eaten  by  the  officiating  priests  within
the  Holy  Place,  the  lamb  offered  for  such  a  Nazarite  might  be
eaten  by  others  also,  and  anywhere  within  Jerusalem.  The
blood  of  the  trespass-offering  (like  that  of  the  burnt-offering)
was  thrown  on  the  corners  of  the  altar  below  the  red  line.

IV.  The  most  joyous  of  all  sacrifices  was  the  peace-offerings
or,  as  from  its  derivation  it  might  also  be  rendered,  the
offering  of  completion.^  This  was,  indeed,  a  season  of  happy-
fellowship  with  the  Covenant  God,  in  which  He  conde-
scended to  become  Israel's  Guest  at  the  sacrificial  meal,
even  as  He  was  always  their  Host.  Thus  it  symbolised  the
spiritual  truth  expressed  in  Rev.  iii.  20 :  "  Behold,  I  stand  at
the  door,  and  knock  :  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the
door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he
with  Me."  In  peace-offerings  the  sacrificial  meal  was  the
point  of  main  importance.  Hence  the  name  "Sevach,"  by-
God  considers  every  wrong  done  to  another,  as  also  a  wrong  done  against  the
Lord  (Psa.  li.  4),  and  hence,  as  needing  a  trespass-offering.

^  Lev.  xiv.  12.  *  Numb.  vi.  10-12.

^  Hence  the  leper  was  banished  from  the  congregation.

*  Lev.  vii.  3.  *  It  always  followed  all  the  other  saciifices.


Burnt y  Sin,   Trespass ,  and  Peace  Offerings.     107

which  it  is  designated  in  the  Pentateuch,  and  which  means
slaying,  in  reference  to  a  meal.  It  is  this  sacrifice  which  is  so
frequently  referred  to  in  the  Book  of  Psalms  as  the  grateful
homage  of  a  soul  justified  and  accepted  before  God.^  If,  on
the  one  hand,  then,  the  "  offering  of  completion  "  indicated
that  there  was  complete  peace  with  God,  on  the  other,  it
was  also  literally  the  offering  of  completeness.  The  peace-
offerings  were  either  public  or  private.  The  two  lambs
offered  every  year  at  Pentecost  ^  were  a  public  peace-offering,
and  the  only  one  which  was  regarded  as  "  most  holy."  As
such  they  were  sacrificed  at  the  north  side  of  the  altar,  and
their  flesh  eaten  only  by  the  officiating  priests,  and  within  the
Holy  Place.  The  other  public  peace-offerings  were  slain  at  the
south  side,  and  their  "  inwards ''  burnt  on  the  altar.^  Then,
after  the  priests  had  received  their  due,  the  rest  was  to  be*
eaten  by  the  offerers  themselves,  either  within  the  courts  of
the  Temple  or  in  Jerusalem.^  On  one  occasion  (i  Kings
viii.  63)  no  less  than  22,000  oxen  and  120,000  sheep  were
so  offered.  Private  peace-offerings  were  of  a  threefold  kind  :^
''sacrifices  of  thanksgiving,''^  "vows,''  and  strictly  "voluntary
offerings."^  The  first  were  in  general  acknowledgment  of
mercies  received  ;  the  last,  the  free  gift  of  loving  hearts,  as
even  the  use  of  the  same  term  in  Ex.  xxv.  2,  xxxv.  29
implies.  Exceptionally  in  this  last  case,  an  animal  that
had  anything  either  '*  defective  "  or  "  superfluous  "  might  be
offered.^

Peace-offerings  were  brought  either  of  male  or  of  female
animals    (chiefly   of    the   former),   but   not  of    pigeons,   the

1  Psa.  li.  17;  liv.  6.  ;  Ivi.  12;  cxvi.  17,  18.  •  Lev.  xxiii.  19.

*  Lev.  iii.  4,  5.  *  Deut.  xxvii.  7.  ^  Lev.  vii.  11.

•  Lev.  vii.  12.  ^  Lev.  vii.  16.  ^  Lev.  xxii.  23.


io8       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

sacrifice  being,  of  course,  always  accompanied  by  a  meat-  and
a  drink-offering.^  As  every  other  sacrifice,  they  needed  im-
position of  hands,  confession,  and  sprinkling  of  blood,  the
latter  being  done  as  in  the  burnt-offering.  Then  the  "  inwards  '*
were  taken  out  and  "  waved  *'  before  the  Lord,  along  with
**the  breast"  and  the  "right  shoulder"  (or,  perhaps  more
correctly,  the  right  leg).  In  reference  to  these  two  wave-
offerings  we  remark,  that  the  breast  properly  belonged  to  the
Lord,  and  that  He  gave  it  to  His  priests,^  while  Israel  gave
the  "  right  shoulder  "  directly  to  the  priests.^  The  ritual  of
waving  has  already  been  described,^  the  meaning  of  the
movement  being  to  present  the  sacrifice,  as  it  were,  to  the
Lord,  and  then  to  receive  it  back  from  Him.  The  Rabbinical
suggestion,  that  there  was  a  distinct  rite  of  "  heaving  "  besides
that  of  "  waving,"  seems  only  to  rest  on  a  misunderstanding
of  such  passages  as  Lev.  ii.  2,  9  ;  vii.  32  ;  x.  15,  etc.^  The
following  were  to  be  "  waved "  before  the  Lord  :  the  breast
of  the  peace-offering  ;^  the  parts  mentioned  at  the  consecration
of  the  priests  ;7  the  first  omer  at  the  Passover  ;^  the  jealousy-
offering  ;^  the  offering  at  the  close  of  a  Nazarite^s  vow  ;^^  the
offering  of  a  cleansed  leper  ;^^  and  ''the  two  lambs  "presented
"  with  the  bread  of  the  firstfruits,"  at  the  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles.^^ The  two  last-mentioned  offerings  were  "waved"
before  being  sacrificed.     After  the  "  waving,"  the  "  inwards  "  ^^

*  Lev.  vii.  11,  etc.  *  Lev.  vii.  30.  ^  Lev.  vii.  32.

*  The  pieces  were  laid  on  the  hands  as  follows  :  the  feet,  and  then  the  breast,
the  right  shoulder,  the  kidneys,  the  caul  of  the  liver,  and,  in  the  case  of  a  thank-
offering,  the  bread  upon  it  all.

®  The  "heave"  is,  in  reality,  only  the  technical  term  for  the  priest's  ** taking**
his  portion.  ^  Lev.  vii.  30.  '^  Lev.  viii.  25-29.

^  Lev.  xxiii.  1 1,  ®  Numb.  v.  25.  ^^  Numb.  vi.  20.

u  Lev.  xiv.  12.  ^  Lev.  xxiii.  20.  ^  Lev.  iii.  3-5,  etc.


Burnt ^  Sin,   Trespass,  and  Peace-Offerings.     109

were  burnt  on  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  and  the  rest  eaten
either  by  priests  or  worshippers,  the  longest  term  allowed  in
any  case  for  the  purpose  being  two  days  and  a  night  from  the
time  of  sacrifice.  Of  course,  the  guests,  among  whom  were
to  be  the  Levites  and  the  poor,  must  all  be  in  a  state  of
Levitical  purity,  symbolical  of  "  the  wedding  garment "  needful
at  the  better  gospel-feast.

We  close  with  a  few  particulars  about  meat-offerings.
These  were  either  brought  in  conjunction  with  burnt-  and
peace-offerings  (but  never  with  sin-  or  with  trespass-offerings)
or  else  by  themselves.  The  latter  were  €\\h^x  public  ox  private
meat-offerings.  The  three  public  meat-offerings  were  :  the
twelve  loaves  of  shewbread,  renewed  every  sabbath,  and  after-
wards eaten  by  the  priests  ;  the  omer,  or  sheaf  of  the  harvest,
on  the  second  day  of  the  Passover  ;  and  the  two  wave-loaves
at  Pentecost.  Four  of  the  private  meat-offerings  were  en-
joined by  the  law,  viz.  :  i,  the  daily  meat-offering  of  the  high-
priest,  according  to  the  Jewish  interpretation  of  Lev.  vi.  20  ;
2,  that  at  the  consecration  of  priests  ;^  3,  that  in  substi-
tution for  a  sin-offering,  in  case  of  poverty ;-  and  that  of
jealousy.^''  The  following  five  were  purely  voluntary,  viz.,
that  of  fine  flour  with  oil,  unbaken  ;^  that  "baken  in  a  pan  ;"
'*  in  a  frying-pan  ;"  "in  the  oven;"  and  the  "wafers."^  All
these  offerings  were  to  consist  of  at  least  one  omer  of  corn
(which  was  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah).^  But  any  larger
number  under  61  omers  might  be  offered,  the  reason  of  the
limitation  being,  that  as  the  public  meat-offerings  enjoined
on  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  amounted    to  6\^  all    private

^  Lev.  vL  20.  *  Lev.  v.  ii,  12.  ^  Numb.  v.  15.

*  Lev.  ii.  I.  ^  Lev.  ii.  4-7.  ®  Ex.  xvi.  36.

'  See  Relancks,   p.  353.    This,  however,  only  when  the  feast  fell  on  a  sabbath.


1 1  o       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

offerings  must  be  less  than  that  number.  In  all  baken  meat-
offerings, an  "omer"  was  always  made  into  ten  cakes — the
symbolical  number  of  completeness — except  in  that  of  the  high-
priest's  daily  meat  offering,  of  which  twelve  cakes  were  baken,
as  representative  of  Israel.  Finally,  as  the  Rabbis  express  it,
every  meat-offering  prepared  in  a  vessel  had  '*  three  pourings
of  oil  " — first  into  the  vessel,  then  to  mingle  with  the  flour,  and
lastly,  after  it  was  ready — the  frankincense  being  then  put
upon  it.  The  "  wafers  "  were  "  anointed  ''  with  oil,  after  the
form  of  the  Hebrew  letter  3,  or  the  Greek  letter  K,  as  they
explain,  "to  run  down  in  two  parts." ^

When  presenting  a  meat-offering,  the  priest  first  brought  it
in  the  golden  or  silver  dish  in  which  it  had  been  prepared,  and
then  transferred  it  to  a  holy  vessel,  putting  oil  and  frankin-
cense upon  it.  Taking  his  stand  at  the  south-eastern  corner
of  the  altar,  he  next  took  the  ''  handful ''  that  was  actually  to
be  burnt,  put  it  in  another  vessel,  laid  some  of  the  frankin-
cense on  it,  carried  it  to  the  top  of  the  altar,  salted  it,  and
then  placed  it  on  the  fire.  The  rest  of  the  meat-offering
belonged  to   the   priests.^     Every  meat-offering  was  accom-

1  The  subjoined  Rabbinical  table  may  be  of  use :
Meat-offerings —

Requiriftg  the  addition  of  oil  and  frankincense :  Of  fine  flour  unbaken  ;  baken
in  a  pan;  baken  in  a  frying-pan;  baken  in  the  oven;  the  ** wafers;"  the  high-
priest's  daily  and  the  priest's  consecration  offering;  the  flour  from  the  **  sheaf"
oifered  on  the  second  day  of  the  Passover.  Requiring  oil  without  frankiftcense :
All  meat-offerings,  accompanying  a  burnt-  or  a  peace-offering.  Requiring  frank"
incense  without  oil:  The  shewbread.  Requiring  neither  oil  nor  fvankhtcense :
The  two  loaves  at  Pentecost ;  the  jealousy- offering ;  and  that  in  substitution  for
a  sin-offering.

*  Except  in  the  meat-offering  of  the  high-priest,  and  of  priests  at  their  consecra-
tion ;  the  exception  in  both  cases  for  the  obvious  reason  already  referred  to  in
ex]»laining  sacrificial  meals.  Similarly,  the  meat-offerings  connected  with  burnt.
sacrifices  were  wholly  consumed  on  the  altar.


Btirnt^  Sin^   Trespass,  and  Peace-Offerings.     iii

panied  by  a  drink-offering  of  wine,  which  was  poured  at  the
base  of  the  altar.

So  complicated  a  service,  and  one  which  enjoined  such
frequent  sacrifices,  must  always  have  kept  a  large  number  of
priests  busy  in  the  courts  of  the  Temple.  This  was  especially
the  case  on  the  great  festivals  ;  and  if  the  magnificent  Temple
could  hold  its  210,000  worshippers — if  the  liturgy,  music,  and
ritual  were  equally  gorgeous — we  cannot  wonder  that  it  re-
quired multitudes  of  white-robed  priests  properly  to  discharge
its  ministry.  Tradition  has  it,  that  on  the  Day  of  Atonement
no  less  than  five  hundred  priests  were  wont  to  assist  in  the
services.  On  other  feast-days  even  more  must  have  been
engaged,  as  it  was  a  Rabbinical  principle,  '*  that  a  man  should
bring  all  his  offerings,  that  were  either  due  from  him  or  volun-
tarily dedicated,  at  the  solemn  festival  that  cometh  next"
In  other  words,  if  a  man  incurred  a  sacrifice,  or  voluntarily
promised  one,  he  was  to  bring  it  when  next  he  came  to  Jeru-
salem. But  even  this  provision  showed  "  the  weakness  and  un-
profitableness thereof,"  since  in  all  ordinary  cases  a  long  time
must  have  elapsed  before  the  stain  of  guilt  could  be  con-
sciously removed  by  an  atoning  sacrifice,  or  a  vow  performed.
Blessed  be  God,  the  reality  in  Christ  Jesus  in  this,  as  in  all
other  things,  far  out-distances  the  type  !  For  we  have  always
"liberty  to  enter  into  the  Holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus;"
and  "  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an
heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of
the  flesh,  how  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who
through  the  Eternal  Spirit  offered  Himself  without  spot  to
God,  purge  vour  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the
living  God!"


CHAPTER   VIL

AT  NIGHT  IN  THE  TEMPLE.
** Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his  garments." — Rev.  xvL  IS#

THERE  is  a  marked  peculiarity  and  also  a  special
charm  about  the  allusions  of  the  *'  beloved  disciple "
to  the  "Temple  and  its  services."  The  other  New  Testa-
ment writers  refer  to  them  in  their  narratives,  or  else  explain
their  types,  in  such  language  as  any  well-informed  worshipper
at  Jerusalem  might  have  employed.  But  John  writes  not
like  an  ordinary  Israelite.  He  has  eyes  and  ears  for  details
which  others  would  have  left  unnoticed.  As,  according  to  a
Jewish  tradition,  the  high-priest  read  the  Divine  answer  of
the  Urim  and  Thummim  by  a  heavenly  light  cast  upon
special  letters  in  the  names  of  the  tribes  graven  upon  his
breastplate,  so  to  John  the  presence  and  the  words  of  Jesus
seem  to  render  luminous  the  well-remembered  services  of  the
Temple.  This,  as  we  shall  have  frequent  occasion  to  show,
appears  in  his  Gospel,  but  much  more  in  the  Book  of  Revela-
tion. Indeed,  the  Apocalypse,  as  a  whole,  may  be  likened
to  the  Temple  services  in  its  mingling  of  prophetic  symbols
with  worship  and  praise.  But  it  is  specially  remarkable,  that
the   temple-references  with   which   the   Book  of  Revelation


At  Night  in  the  Temple.  113

abounds  are  generally  to  mimtticey  which  a  writer  who
had  not  been  as  familiar  with  such  details,  as  only  personal
contact  and  engagement  with  them  could  have  rendered  him,
would  scarcely  have  even  noticed,  certainly  not  employed
as  part  of  his  imagery.  They  come  in  naturally,  sponta-
neously, and  so  unexpectedly,  that  the  reader  is  occasionally
in  danger  of  overlooking  them  altogether ;  and  in  language
such  as  a  professional  man  would  employ,  which  would  come
to  him  from  the  previous  exercise  of  his  calling.  Indeed,
some  of  the  most  striking  of  these  references  could  not  have
been  understood  at  all  without  the  professional  treatises  of
the  Rabbis  on  the  Temple  and  its  services.  Only  the  studied
minuteness  of  Rabbinical  descriptions,  derived  from  the
tradition  of  eye-witnesses,  does  not  leave  the  same  impres-
sion as  the  unstudied  illustrations  of  St.  John.  These  natu-
rally suggest  the  twofold  inference  that  the  Book  of  Revelation
and  the  Fourth  Gospel  must  have  been  written  before  the
Temple  services  had  actually  ceased,  and  by  one  who  had
not  merely  been  intimately  acquainted  with,  but  probably
at  one  time  an  actor  in  them.^     The  argument  may  be  illus-

^  This  is  not  the  place  for  further  critical  discussions.  Though  the  arguments  in
■  support  of  our  view  are  only  inferential,  they  seem  to  us  none  the  less  conclusive.
It  is  not  only  that  the  name  of  John  (given  also  to  the  son  of  the  priest  Zacharias)
reappears  among  the  kindred  of  the  high-priest  (Acts  iv.  6),  nor  that  his  priestly
descent  would  account  for  that  acquaintance  with  the  high-priest  (John  xviii.  15,
16)  which  gave  him  access  apparently  into  the  council-chamber  itself,  while  Peter,
for  whom  he  had  gained  admittance  to  the  palace,  was  in  **the  porch;"  nor  yet
that,  though  residing  in  Galilee,  the  house  of  '*his  own''  to  which  he  took  the
mother  of  Jesus  (John  xix.  27)  was  probably  at  Jerusalem,  like  that  of  other
priests — notably  of  the  Levite  family  of  Barnabas  (Acts  xii.  12) — a  supposition  con-
firmed by  his  apparent  entertainment  of, Peter,  when  Mary  Magdalene  found  them
together  on  the  morning  of  the  resurrection  (John  xx.  2).  But  it  seems  highly
improbable  that  a  book  so  full  of  liturgical  allusions  as  the  Book  of  Revelation —

I


114       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

trated  by  an  analogous  case.  Quite  lately,  they  who  have
dug  under  the  ruins  of  the  Temple  have  discovered  one  of
those  tablets  in  the  Court  of  the  Temple  which  warned
Gentiles,  on  pain  of  death,  not  to  advance  farther  into  the
sanctuary.  The  tablet  answers  exactly  to  the  description
of  Josephus,  and  its  inscription  is  almost  literally  as  he  gives
it.^  This  tablet  seems  like  a  witness  suddenly  appearing,
after  eighteen  centuries,  to  bear  testimony  to  the  narrative
of  Josephus  as  that  of  a  contemporary  writer.  Much  the
same  instantaneous  conviction,  only  greatly  stronger,  is
carried  to  our  minds,  when,  in  the  midst  of  some  dry  account
of  what  went  on  in  the  Temple,  we  suddenly  come  upon  the
very  words  which  St.  John  had  employed  to  describe  heavenly
realities.  Perhaps  one  of  the  most  striking  instances  of  this
kind  is  afforded  by  the  words  quoted  at  the  head  of  this
chapter  —  '*  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his
garments."  They  literally  describe,  as  we  learn  from  the
Rabbis,  the  punishment  awarded  to  the  Temple-guards  if
found  asleep  at  their  posts  ;  and  the  Rabbinical  account  of  it
is  curiously  confirmed  by  the  somewhat  naive  confession
of  one  of  their  number,^  that  on  a  certain  occasion  his  own
maternal  uncle  had  actually  undergone  the  punishment  of
having  his  clothes  set  on  fire  by  the  captain  of  the  Temple
as  he  went  his  rounds  at  night.


and  these,  many  of  them,  not  to  great  or  important  points,  but  to  minutice — could
have  been  written  by  any  other  than  a  priest,  and  one  who  had  at  one  time  been  in
actual  service  in  the  Temple  itself,  and  thus  become  so  intimately  conversant  with
its  details,  that  they  came  to  him  naturally,  as  part  of  the  imagery  he  employed.

^  See  tlje  account  of  this  remarkable  discovery  by  M.  Clermont-Ganneau  in  his
letter  to  the  Athenceum^  reprinted  in  the  Quarterly  Statement  of  the  Palestim
Exploration  Fundiox  August,  1 87 1,  pp.  132,  133.

•  Rabbi  Elieser  ben  Jacob.     See  Middoth^  i.  2.


Ai  Night  in  the  Temple.  115

For  the  service  of  the  officiating  ministers  was  not  only  by
day,  but  also  ''  at  night  in  the  Temple."  From  Scripture  we
know  that  the  ordinary  services  of  the  sanctuary  consisted  of
the  morning  and  evening  sacrifices.  To  these  the  Rabbis  add
another  evening  service,  probably  to  account  for  their  own
transference  of  the  evening  service  to  a  much  later  hour  than  I
that  of  the  sacrifice/  There  is,  however,  some  difficulty
about  the  exact  time  when  each  of  the  sacrifices  was  offered.
According  to  general  agreement,  the  morning  sacrifice  was  j
brought  at  the  "  third  hour,"  corresponding  to  our  nine  o'clock.  \
But  the  preparations  for  it  must  have  commenced  more
than  two  hours  earher.  Few,  if  any,  worshippers  could  have
witnessed  the  actual  slaying  of  the  lamb,  which  took  place
immediately  on  opening  the  great  Temple-gate.  Possibly
they  may  have  gathered  chiefly  to  join  in  the  prayer  *'  at  the
time  of  incense."^  In  the  modified  sense,  then,  of  understand-
ing by  the  morning  sacrifice  the  whole  service,  it  no  doubt
coincided  with  the  third  hour  of  the  day,  or  9  A.M.  This  may
explain  how  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  such  a  multitude  could
so  readily  "  come  together,"  to  hear  in  their  various  tongues
"the  wonderful  works  of  God  " — seeing  it  was  the  third  hour,'
when  they  would  all  be  in  the  Temple.  The  evening  sacrifice
was  fixed  by  the  law  *  as  "  between  the  evenings,"  that  is,
between  the  darkness  of  the  gloaming  and  that  of  the  night.®

^  The  Rabbinical  statement  about  a  correspondence  between  that  service  and
'*  the  burning  of  the  yet  unconsumed  fat  and  flesh  "  of  the  sacrifices  (which  must
have  lasted  all  night)  is  so  far-fetched  that  we  wonder  to  see  it  in  Kitto's  Cyclo-
pcedia,  third  edition  (art.  Synagogue),  while  Gratz's  assertion  that  it  corresponded
to  the  closing  of  the  Temple  gates  \Gesch.^  vol.  iii.  p.  97)  is  quite  unsupported.

^  Luke  i.  10.  2  Acts  ii.  15.  *  Numb,  xxviii.  4,  8.

5  Sunset  was  calculated  as  on  an  average  at  6  o'clock  p.m.  For  a  full  discus-
sion and  many  speculations  on  the  whole  subject,  see  Herzfeld,  Gesch.  d.  V,  Is.,
vol.  iii.     Excurs  xxiv.  par.  2.


\


Ii6      T^e  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Such  admonitions  as  "  to  show  forth  thy  faithfulness  every
night  upon  an  instrument  of  ten  strings  and  on  the  psaltery,"^
and  the  call  to  those  who  '^  by  night  stand  in  the  house  of  the
Lord,"  to  **  lift  up  their  hands  in  the  sanctuary  and  bless  the
Lord,"^  seem  indeed  to  imply  an  evening  service — an  impres-
4  sion  confirmed  by  the  appointment  of  Levite  singers  for  night
service  in  i  Chron.  ix.  33  ;  xxiii.  30.  But  at  the  time  of  our
Lord  the  evening  sacrifice  certainly  commenced  much  earlier.
Josephus  puts  it  down  ^  as  at  the  ninth  hour.  According  to
the  Rabbis  the  lamb  was  slain  at  the  eighth  hour  and  a-half,
or  about  2.30  P.M.,  and  the  pieces  laid  on  the  altar  an  hour
later — about  3.30  P.M.  Henice,  when  "  Peter  and  John  went
up  together  into  the  Temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  being  the
ninth  hour,"*  it  must  have  been  for  the  evening  sacrifice,  or
rather  half  an  hour  later,  and,  as  the  words  indicate,  for  the
**  prayer"  that  accompanied  the  offering  of  incense.  The
evening  service  was  somewhat  shorter  than  that  of  the  morning,
and  would  last,  at  any  rate,  about  an  hour  and  a-half,  say  till
about  four  o'clock,  thus  well  meeting  the  original  requirement
in  Numb,  xxviii.  4.  After  that  no  other  offering  might  be
brought  except  on  the  eve  of  the  Passover,  when  the  ordinary
evening  sacrifice  took  place  two  hours  earlier,  or  at  12.30  P.M.^
We  can  conceive  the  laborious  work  of  the  day  over,  and
the  rest  and  solemnity  of  "  night  in  the  Temple"  begun.  The
last  notes  of  the  Temple  music  have  died  out,  and  the  wor-
shippers slowly  retired,  some  after  lingering  for  private  prayer,

^  Psa,  xcii.  2,  3.  *  Psa.  cxxxiv.  ^  Ant.  xiv.  4,  3.  *  Acts  iii.  i.

5  Accordingly  .the  Rabbis  laid  down  the  principle  that   evening   prayers   (of

course,  out  of  the  Temple)  might  be  lawfully  said  at  any  time  after  12.30  P.  M.   This

explains  how  *' Peter  went  up  upon  the  house-top  to  pray  about  the  sixth  hour,'*

I  or  about  12  o'clock  (Acts  x.  9) — or  to  what  was  really  "evening  prayer."     Comp.

i  Kitto's  Cycl,  iii.  p.  904.


At  Night  in  the  Temple.  117

or  else  tarrying  in  one  of  the  marble  porches.  Already  the
short  Eastern  day  is  fading  out  in  the  west  Far  over  the
mountains  of  Gibeon  the  sun  is  sinking  in  that  ocean  across
which  the  better  light  is  so  soon  to  shine.  The  new  company
of  priests  and  Levites  who  are  to  conduct  the  services  of  the
morrow  are  coming  up  from  Ophel  under  the  leadership  of
their  heads  of  houses,  their  elders.  Those  who  have  officiated
during  the  day  are  preparing  to  leave  by  another  gate.  They
have  put  off  their  priestly  dress,  depositing  it  in  the  appointed
chambers,  and  resumed  that  of  ordinary  laymen,  and  their
sandals.  For  such,  although  not  shoes,  might  be  worn  in  the
Temple,  the  priests  being  barefoot  only  during  their  actual
ministry.  Nor  did  they  otherwise  wear  any  distinctive  dress,
not  even  the  high-priest  himself,  nor  yet  those  who  performed
in  the  Temple  other  than  strictly  sacrificial  services.^  As
for  the  Levites,  they  had  no  clerical  dress  at  all,  but  only
wore  the  white  linen,^  till  they  obtained  from  Agrippa  II.
permission  to  wear  priestly  garments — as  Josephus  rightly
remarks,  '*  contrary  to  the  laws  of  our  country."^

We  know  that  on  Sabbaths  at  least,  when  one  company  gave
place  to  another,  or,  rather,  as  the  outgoing  course  left  the
Temple  precincts,  they  parted  from  each  other  with  a  fare-
well, reminding  us  of  St.  Paul's  to  the  Corinthians,*  '*  He
that  has  caused  His  name  to  dwell  in  this  house  cause  love,
brotherhood,   peace,   and    friendship  to  dwell   among  you."

1  Those  who,. being  declared  physically  unfit,  discharged  only  menial  functions,
wore  not  the  priestly  dress.  They  on  whom  no  lot  had  fallen  for  daily  minis-
tration put  off  their  priestly  garments — all  save  the  linen  breeches — and  also  per-
formed subordinate  functions.  But,  according  to  some,  it  was  lawful  for  priests  while
in  the  Temple  to  wear  their  peculiar  dress — all  but  the  girdle,  worn  always  and
only  on  sacrificial  duty.

2  2  Chron.  v.  12.  '  Ant,  xx.  9,  6.  *  2  Cor.  xiii.  11.


1 1 8        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Each  of  the  twenty-four  *'  courses "  into  which  not  only  the
priests  and  Levites,  but  also  all  Israel,  by  means  of  repre-
sentatives, were  divided,  served  for  one  week,  from  Sab-
bath to  Sabbath,  distributing  the  daily  service  among  their
respective  "families"  or  ** houses."  For  the  Sabbath  the
new  ministrants  came  earlier  than  on  week-days.^  As  the
"family"  whose  daily  "  ministration  was  accomplished"  left
the  Temple,  the  massive  gates  were  closed  by  priests  or
Levites,  some  requiring  the  united  strength  of  twenty  men.
Then  the  Temple  keys  were  hung  up  in  a  hollow  square,
under  a  marble  slab  in  the  "  fire-room "  (Beth-ha-Moked),
which  may  also  be  designated  as  the  chief  guard-room  of  the
priests.  Now,  as  the  stars  were  shining  out  on  the  deep  blue
Eastern  sky,  the  priests  would  gather  for  converse^  or  the
evening  meal.^  Pieces  of  the  sacrifices  and  the  "  prepared  "
first-fruits  (the  Therumoth)  supplied  the  needful  refreshments.*
Though  the  work  of  the  day  was  over,  certain  arrangements
had  yet  to  be  made.  For  the  Levites  in  charge  of  collecting
the  tithes  and  other  business  details  were  wont  to  purchase
in  large  quantities  what  each  who  brought  any  sacrifice
needed  for  meat  and  drink  off*erings,  and  to  sell  it  to  the
offerers.  This  was  a  great  accommodation  to  the  worshipper,
and  a  source  of  daily  profit  to  the  Tem.ple.     On  payment  of

1  Probably  this  had  also  been  the  arrangement  in  the  first  Temple.  See
2  Kings  xi.  9;  2  Chron.  xxiii.  8.      Herzfeld,  u,  s,  p.  185.

^  The  question  of  evening  prayers  in  the  Temple  is  involved  in  some  difficulty.
The  curious  reader  will  find  it  discussed  by  Herzfeld  with  almost  confusing
minuteness.

3  The  partaking  of  sacred  things  by  priests  who  had  been  ceremonially  unclean
is  expressly  stated  by  the  Rabbis  as  **  when  the  stars  shone  out."

*  The  Therumoth,  such  as  oil,  flour,  etc.,  in  opposition  to  those  au  naiurel^  sucli
as  com,  fruits,  etc,  called  the  Biccuriio,


Ai  Night  in  the  Temple.  119

a  price,  fixed  by  tariff  every  month,  the  offerer  received  his
proper  counterfoil,^  in  exchange  for  which  a  Temple  official
gave  him  what  he  needed  for  his  sacrifice.  Now,  the  accounts
t)f  these  transactions  had  to  be  made  up  and  checked'  every
evening.

But  already  the  night-watches  had  been  set  in  the  Temple.
By  day  and  night  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Levites  to  keep
guard  at  the  gates,  to  prevent,  so  far  as  possible,  the  un-
clean from  entering.  To  them  the  duties  of  the  Temple
police  were  also  entrusted,  under  the  command  of  an  official
known  to  us  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  "  captain  of  the
Temple,''^  but  in  Jewish  writings  chiefly  as  *^the  man  of  the
Temple  Mount.*'  The  office  must  have  been  of  considerable
responsibility,  considering  the  multitude  on  feast  days,  their
keen  national  susceptibilities,  and  the  close  proximity  of  the
hated  Romans  in  Fort  Antonia.  At  night  guards  were  placed
in  twenty-four  stations  about  the  gates  and  courts.  Of  these
twenty-one  were  occupied  by  Levites  alone ;  the  other  inner-
most three  jointly  by  priests  and  Levites.^  Each  guard  con-
sisted  of  ten  men ;  so  that  in  all  240  Levites  and  thirty
priests  were  on  duty  every  night.  The  Temple  guards  were
relieved  by  day,  but  not  during  the  night,  which  the  Romans
divided  into  four,  but  the  Jews,  properly,  into  three  watches,
the  fourth  being  really  the  morning  watch,*  Hence,  when
the  Lord  saith,  ^*  Blessed  are  those  servants  whom  the  lord

1  Of  these  there  were  four  kinds,  respectively  bearing  the  words  **male,"  when
the  sacrifice  was  a  ram;  ** sinner,"  when  it  was  a  sin-offering;  and  for  other
offerings,  **  calf,"  or  *'  kid."

^  Acts  iv.  I,  etc.

*  The  watch  at  some  of  the  gates  seems  at  one  time  to  have  been  hereditary  in
certain  families.     For  this,  see  Herzfeld,  vol.  i.  p.  419 ;  ii.  p.  57.

*  Compare  Matt.  xiv.  25,     Sec,  however,  the  discussion  in  Jer.  Ber,  i.  I,


I20       The  Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

when  he  cometh  shall  find  watching,"  He  expressly  refers  to
the  second  and  third  watches  as  those  of  deepest  sleep/

During  the  night  the  ''  captain  of  the  Temple  "  made  his
rounds.  On  his  approach  the  guards  had  to  rise  and  salute
him  in  a  particular  manner.  Any  guard  found  asleep  when
on  duty  was  beaten,  or  his  garments  were  set  on  fire — a
punishment,  as  we  know,  actually  awarded.  Hence  the
admonition  to  us  who,  as  it  were,  are  here  on  Temple  guard,
**  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his  garments."*
But,  indeed,  there  could  have  been  little  inclination  to  sleep
within  the  Temple,  even  had  the  deep  emotion  natural  in  the
circumstances  allowed  it.  True,  the  chief  of  the  course  and
"  the  heads  of  families  "  reclined  on  couches  along  that  part  of
the  Beth-Moked  in  which  it  was  lawful  to  sit  down,^  and  the
older  priests  might  lie  on  the  floor,  having  wrapped  their
priestly  garments  beside  them,  while  the  younger  men  kept
watch.  But  then  the  preparations  for  the  service  of  the
morning  required  each  to  be  early  astir.  The  priest  whose
duty  it  was  to  superintend  the  arrangements  might  any
moment  knock  at  the  door  and  demand  entrance.  He  came
suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  no  one  knew  when.  The  Rabbis
use  almost  the  very  words  in  which  Scripture  describes  the
unexpected  coming  of  the  Master,*  when  they  say,  *'  Some-
times he  came  at  the  cock-crowing,  sometimes  a  little  earlier,
sometimes  a  little  later.  He  came  and  knocked,  and  they
opened  to  him.  Then  said  he  unto  them,  All  ye  who
have  washed,  come  and  cast  lots."^     For  the  customary  bath

'  Luke  xii.  38.  3  Rev.  xvi.  15.

3  The  part  built  out  on  the  Chel ;  for  it  was  not  lawful  for  any  but  the  king  to
sit  down  anywhere  within  the  enclosure  of  the  **  Priests'  Court."
*  Mark  xiii.  35.  *  Mishnah,  Ta?nid,  L  I5  ««


At  Night  in  the  Temple.  121

required  to  have  been  taken  before  the  superintending  priest
came  round,  since  it  was  a  principle  that  none  might  go  into
the  court  to  serve,  although  he  were  clean,  unless  he  had
bathed.  A  subterranean  passage,  lit  on  both  sides,  led  to  the
well-appointed  bath-rooms  where  the  priests  immersed  them-
selves. After  that  they  needed  not^  all  that  day  to  wash  again,
save  their  hands  and  feet,  which  they  had  to  do  each  time,
however  often,  they  came  for  service  into  the  Temple.  It
was,  no  doubt,  to  this  that  our  Lord  referred  in  His  reply  to
Peter  :  "  He  that  is  washed  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his  feet,
but  is  clean  every  whit."^

Those  who  were  prepared  now  followed  the  superintending
priest  through  a  wicket  into  the  court.  Here  they  divided
into  two  companies,  each  carrying  a  torch,  except  on  the
Sabbaths,  when  the  Temple  itself  was  lit  up.  One  company
passed  eastwards,  the  other  westwards,  till,  having  made  their
circuit  of  inspection,  they  met  at  the  chamber  where  the
high-priest's  daily  meat-offering  was  prepared,^  and  reported,
*'  It  is  well !  All  is  well !  "  Thereupon  those  who  were  to
prepare  the  high-priest's  offering  were  set  to  their  work,  and
the  priests  passed  into  the  '*  Hall  of  Polished  Stones,"*  to
cast  lots  for  the  services  of  the  day.  This  arrangement  had
been  rendered  necessary  by  certain  painful  scenes  to  which
the  eagerness  of  the  priests  for  service  had  led.  Altogether
the  lot  was  cast  four  times,  though  at  different  periods  of  the
service.     It  was  done  in  this  manner.     The  priests  stood  in

1  Except  under  one  circumstance.

2  John  xiii.  lo.  The  pecuHarities  of  our  Lord's  washing  the  feet  of  the  disciples
are  pointed  out  in  Lightfoot,  Hor.  Heb.,  p.  1094.

3  Lev.  vi.  12-16,  according  to  the  Rabbinical  interpretation  of  the  law.

*  Or  Gazith,  where  also  the  Sanhedrim  met.  The  sittings  were,  in  that  part,
■juilt  out  on  the  CheU


122        The  Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

a  circle  around  the  president,  who  for  a  moment  removed
the  head-gear  of  one  of  their  number,  to  show  that  he  would
begin  counting  at  him.  Then  all  held  up  one,  two,  or  more
fingers — since  it  was  not  lawful  in  Israel  to  count  persons-^
when  the  president  named  some  number,  say  seventy,  and
began  counting  the  fingers  till  he  reached  the  number  named,
which  marked  that  the  lot  had  fallen  on  that  priest.  The  first
lot  was  for  cleansing  the  altar  and  preparing  it ;  the  second,  for
those  who  were  to  offer  the  sacrifice,  and  for  those  who  were  to
cleanse  the  candlestick  and  the  altar  of  incense  in  the  Holy
Place.  The  third  lot  was  the  most  important.  It  determined
who  was  to  ofier  the  incense.  If  possible,  none  was  to  take
part  in  it  who  had  at  any  previous  time  officiated  in  the
same  capacity.  The  fourth  lot,  which  followed  close  on  the
third,  fixed  those  who  were  to  burn  the  pieces  of  the  sacrifice
on  the  altar,  and  to  perform  the  concluding  portions  of  the
service.  The  morning  lot  held  good  also  for  the  same  offices
at  the  evening  sacrifice,  save  that  the  lot  was  cast  anew  for
the  burning  of  the  incense.

When  the  priests  were  gathered  for  '*  the  first  lot "  in
the  "  Hall  of  Polished  Stones,"  as  yet  only  the  earliest  glow
of  morning  light  streaked  the  Eastern  sky.  Much  had  to  be
done  before  the  lamb  itself  could  be  slain.  It  was  a  law
that,  as  no  sacrifice  might  be  brought  after  that  of  the
evening,  nor  after  the  sun  had  set,  so,  on  the  other  hand,
the  morning  sacrifice  was  only  to  be  slain  after  the  morning
light  had  lit  up  "  the  whole  sky  as  far  as  Hebron,"  yet  before
the  sun  had  actually  risen  upon  the  horizon.^  The  only
exception  was   on   the   great   festivals^  when  the  altar  was

*  Maimonides,  Yad  ha  Chazakah^  the  tractate  on  the  daily  sacrifice,  ch.  i.  par,  2.


At  Night  in  the   Temple.  123

cleansed  much  earlier/  to  afford  time  for  examining  before
actual  sunrise  the  very  numerous  sacrifices  which  were  to
be  brought  during  the  day.  Perhaps  it  was  on  this  ground,
that  on  the  morning  of  the  Passover  they  who  led  Jesus  from
Caiaphas  thronged  so  "  early  "  "  the  judgment-hall  of  Pilate."
Thus,  while  some  of  them  would  be  preparing  in  the  Tempb
to  offer  the  morning  sacrifice,  others  were  at  the  same
moment  unwittingly  fulfilling  the  meaning  of  that  very  type,
when  He  on  whom  was  **  laid  the  iniquity  of  us  all "  was
''brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter." *

1  For  the  three  great  festivals,  in  the  first  watch ;  for  the  Day  of  Atonement,  at
midnight.     See  also  Lightfoot,  Hor.  Heb,^  p.  1135.

2  Isa.  liii.  7,


CHAPTER    VIIL

THE  MORNING  AND  THE  EVENING  SACRIFICE.*

•*  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  while  he  executed  the  priest's  office  before  God  in  the

order  of  his  course,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  priest's  office,  his  lot  was

to  burn  incense  when  he  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord.     And  the  whole

(^  multitude  of  the  people  were  praying  without  at  the  time  of  incense." —

Luke  i.  8-10.

BEFORE  proceeding  to  describe  the  "morning  sacrifice,"
it  is  necessary  to  advert  to  a  point  of  considerable
interest  and  importance.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  at  the
time  of  Christ,  public  prayer  occupied  a  very  prominent
place  in  the  ordinary  daily  services  of  the  Temple.  Yet  the
original  institution  in  the  law  of  Moses  contains  no  mention  of
it ;  and  such  later  instances  as  the  prayer  of  Hannah,  or  that
of  Solomon  at  the  dedication  of  the  Temple,  afford  neither
indication  nor  precedent  as  regards  the  ordinary  public  ser-
vices. The  confession  of  the  high-priest  over  the  scape-goat  ^
cannot  be  regarded  as  public  prayer.  Perhaps  the  nearest
approach  to  it  was  on  occasion  of  offering  the  first-fruits,
especially  in  that  concluding  entreaty :  ^  "  Look  down  from
Thy  holy  habitation,  from  heaven,  and  bless  Thy  people
Israel,  and  the  land  which  Thou  hast  given  us,  as  Thou
swarest  unto  our  fathers,  a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and

I  In  Hebrew,  Tamid^  the  constant  sacrifice,  sacrificium  juge.

»  Lev.  xvl  21.  ^  Deut.  xxvi.  15.


The  Morning  and  the  Event7tg  Sacrifice.       125

honey."  But,  after  all,  this  was  again  private,  not  public
prayer,  and  offered  on  a  private  occasion,  far  different  from
the  morning  and  evening  sacrifices.  The  wording  of  King
Solomon's  prayer  ^  implies  indeed  an  act  of  united  and  con-
gregational worship,  but,  strictly  speaking,  it  conveys  no  more
than  that  public  supplication  was  wont  to  be  offered  in  times  of
public  necessity.  2  Nor  can  anything  definite  be  inferred  from
the  allusions  of  Isaiah  to  the  hypocrisy  of  his  contemporaries  ^
in  spreading  forth  their  hands  and  making  many  prayers.*

It  was  otherwise  after  the  return  from  Babylon,  With
the  institution  and  spread  of  synagogues — designed  for  the
twofold  purpose,  that  in  every  place  Moses  should  be  read
every  Sabbath  day,  and  to  provide  a  place  ''where  prayer
was  wont  to  be  made  " — the  practice  of  public  worship  soon
became  general.  In  Neh.  xi.  17  we  find  already  a  special
appointment  **  to  begin  the  thanksgiving  in  prayer.''  After-
wards progress  in  this  direction  was  rapid.  The  Apocrypha
afford  painful  evidence  hov/  soon  all  degenerated  into  a  mere
form,  and  how  prayer  became  a  work  of  self-righteousness,
by  which  merit  might  be  obtained.  This  brings  us  to  the
Pharisees  of  the  New  Testament,  with  their  ostentatious  dis-
plays of  devotion,  and  the  hypocrisy  of  their  endless  prayers,
full  of  needless  repetitions  and  odious  self-assertion.  At  the
outset  we  here  meet,  as  usual,  at  least  seeming  contradictions.
On  the  one  hand  the  Rabbis  define  every  attitude  and  gesture
in  prayer,  fix  the  most  rigid  formulas,  trace  each  of  them  up
to  one  of  the  patriarchs,^  and  would  have  us  believe  that  the

^  I  Kings  viii.  ^  j  Kings  viii.  30-52.  *  Isaiah  i.  15.

*  Such  language  as  that  of  Psa.  xxvii.  4  seems  also  to  point  to  the  absence  of  any
liturgy  :  "  to  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord."

^  The  Rabbis  ascribe  the  origin  of  the  morning  prayeps  to  Abraham,  that  of  the


126       The  TempUy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

pious  have  their  nine  hours  of  devotion,  laying  down  this
curious  principle,  suited  to  both  worlds — ^*  Prolix  prayer  pro-
tracts life."  On  the  other  hand,  they  also  tell  us  that  prayer
may  be  contracted  within  the  narrowest  limits,  and  that  a  mere
summary  of  the  prescribed  formulas  is  sufficient ;  while  some
of  their  number  go  the  length  of  strenuously  contending  for
free  prayer.  In  fact,  free  prayer,  liturgical  formulas,  and  special
prayers  taught  by  celebrated  Rabbis,  were  alike  in  use.  Free
prayer  would  find  its  place  in  such  private  devotions  as  are
described  in  the  parable  of  the  Publican  and  the  Pharisee.
It  also  mingled  with  the  prescribed  liturgical  formulas.
It  may  be  questioned  whether,  even  in  reference  to  the  latter,
the  words  were  always  rigidly  adhered  to,  perhaps  even  accu-
rately remembered.  Hence  the  Talmud  lays  it  down  (in  the
treatise  BerachotJi)^  that  in  such  cases  it  sufficed  to  say  the
substance  of  the  prescribed  prayers.

That  liturgical  formulas  were  used  not  only  in  the
Temple,  but  in  the  daily  private  devotions,  cannot  be
doubted.  The  first  trace  of  them  appears  so  early  as  in  the
arrangement  of  the  Psalter,  each  of  its  first  four  books  closing
with  a  "  eulogy,"  or  benediction,^  and  the  fifth  book  with  a
psalm  which  may  be  designated  as  one  grand  doxology.^
Although  it  is  a  task  of  no  small  difficulty  to  separate  the
ancient  prayers  of  Temple-times  from  the  later  additions,
which  have  gradually  swelled  into  the  present  Jewish  prayer-
book,  it  has,  in  great  measure,  successfully  been  accom-
plished.^     Besides    such    liturgical    formulas,   some    prayers

afternoon  prayers  to  Isaac,  and  of  the,  evening  prayers  to  Jacob.  In  each  case  sup-
posed scriptural  evidence  for  it  is  dragged  in  bysome  artificial  mode  of  interpretation.

1  Psa.  xli.  ;  Ixxii.  ;  Ixxxix.  ;  cvi.  2  psa.  cl.

2  We  here  specially  refer  to  the  classical  work  of  Zunz,  Die  GoUesd.  Vortr:  (L
Juden,  Berlin,  1832.


The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.       127

taught  by  celebrated  Rabbis  have  been  preserved.  It  was  in
accordance  with  this  practice  that  John  the  Baptist  seems
to  have  given  forms  of  prayer  to  his  followers,  and  that  the
disciples  asked  the  Saviour  to  teach  them  to  pray.^

The  prayer  spoken  by  the  Lord  far  transcended  any  that
Jewish  Rabbis  ever  conceived,  even  where  its  wording  most
nearly  approaches  theirs.^  It  is  characteristic  that  two  of  its
petitions  find  no  real  counterpart  in  the  prayers  of  the
Rabbis.  These  are  :  '*  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,"  and  '*  Lead
us  not  into  temptation."  In  the  Temple  the  people  never
responded  to  the  prayers  by  an  Amen,  but  always  with  this
benediction,  "Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  glory  of  His  king-
dom for  ever !  "^  This  formula  was  traced  up  to  the  patriarch
Jacob,  on  his  death-bed.  In  regard  to  "the  kingdom,"  what-
ever the  Rabbis  understood  by  it,  the  feeling  was  so  strong,
that  it  was  said  :  "  Any  prayer  which  makes  not  mention  of
the  kingdom,  is  not  a  prayer  at  all."

The  attitude  to  be  observed  during  prayer  is  very  accu-
rately defined  by  the  Rabbis.  The  worshipper  was  to
stand,  turning  towards  the  Holy  Place ;  he  was  to  com-
pose his  body  and  his  clothes,  to  draw  his  feet  close
together,  to  cast  down  his  ^y^s,  at  least  at  the  beginning  of
his  prayer,  to  cross  his  hands  over  his  breast,  and  to  "  stand

*  Luke  xi.  i.

^  It  must  always  be  kept  in  mind  that  such  expressions  as  **  Our  Father,"  **  Thy
kingdom  come,"  and  others  like  them,  meant  in  the  mouth  of  the  Rabbis  a  pre-
dominance of  the  narrowest  Judaism ;  in  fact,  the  subjection  of  all  the  world  to
Rabbinical  ordinances,  and  the  carnal  glory  of  Israel.

^  Thus  the  words  in  our  Authorized  Version,  Matt.  vi.  13,  "For  thine  is  the
kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever.  Amen,"  which  are  wanting  in
all  the  most  ancient  MSS.,  are  only  the  common  Temple-formula  of  response,
and  as  such  may  have  found  their  way  into  the  text.  The  word  **  Amen  "  was  in
reality  a  solemn  asseveration  or  a  mode  of  oath.


r


128        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

as  a  servant  before  his  master,  with  all  reverence  and  fear.**
Even  the  priests,  while  ^pronouncing  the  priestly  blessing,
were  to  look  to  the  ground.  In  regard  to  the  special  manner
of  bowing  before  the  Lord,  a  distinction  was  made  between
bending  the  knees,  bending  the  head,  and  falling  prostrate  on
the  ground.  The  latter  was  not  deemed  ''fit  for  every  man,
but  only  for  such  as  knew  themselves  righteous  men,  like
Joshua."!

In  general  the  Rabbis  distinguish  two  elements  in  prayer,
on  the  ground  of  the  two  terms  used  by  Solomon,^ — thanks-
giving and  petition.  To  these  correspond  the  two  kinds  of
early  Jewish  prayer :  the  Eulogies  and  the  Tephillah.^  And
thus  far  correctly,  as  the  two  Hebrew  words  for  prayer
indicate,  the  one  adoration,  the  other  supplication,  or,  rather,
intercession.^  Both  kinds  of  prayer  found  expression  in  the
Temple  services.  But  only  after  the  manifestation  of  Him,
who  in  His  person  united  the  Divine  with  the  human  nature,
could  adoration  and  supplication  be  fully  called  out.  Nay,
the  idea  of  supplication  would  only  be  properly  realised  after
the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  the  people
of  God  also  became  the  children  of  God.  Hence  it  is  not
correct  to  designate  sacrifices  as  "prayers  without  words," ^.
The  sacrifices  were  in  no  sense  prayers,  but  rather  the  pre-
paration for  prayer.  The  Tabernacle  was,  as  its  Hebrew
designation  shows,  the  place  *' of  meeting''^  between  God  and

1  See  Lightfoot,  De  Minist.  Templi,  ch.  x.  sect.  10.  ^  j  Kings  viii.  28.

3  We  regret  not  to  enter  more  fully  on  the  subject  of  prayer  among  the  Hebrews
or  on  an  analysis  of  the  remnants  of  prayers  in  Temple-times  preserved  to  us.
But  this  is  not  the  place  for  such  discussions.  See,  however,  a  note  farther  on  in
this  chapter.

*  Delitzsch,  Bibl.  Com.  iiber  Is.^  p.  45  note.

*  Pressel,  in  Herzog's  EncycL,  vol.  iv.  p.  680.

*  The  Ohel  Moed.^  **  tabernacle  of  meeting" — not  "of  the  congregation,"'  as  in


The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.       129

Israel ;  the  sacrificial  service,  that  which  made  such  meeting
possible  ;  and  the  priest  (as  the  root  of  the  word  implies),  he
who  brought  Israel  near  to  God.  Hence  prayer  could  only
follow  after  the  sacrifice ;  and  its  appropriate  symbol  and  time
was  the  burning  of  incense.  This  view  is  expressed  in  the
words:  "Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before  Thee  as  incense,"^
and  authoritatively  confirmed  in  Rev.  v.  8,  where  we  read  of
the  "golden  vials  full  of  incense,  which  are  the  prayers  of
saints."

It  is  this  burning  of  incense  which  in  the  Gospel  is
alluded  to  in  connection  with  the  birth  of  John  the  Baptist.^
Zacharias  had  come  up  from  the  hill  country  of  Judea,  from
the  neighbourhood  of  priestly  Hebron,  to  minister  in  the
Temple.^  His  course — that  of  Abia — was  on  duty  for  the
week,  and  the  "  house  of  his  fathers  "  for  that  special  day.
More  than  that,  the  lot  had  fallen  on  Zacharias  for  the  most
honourable  service  in  the  daily  ministry — that  of  burning  the
incense  on  the  golden  altar  within  the  Holy  Place.  For  the
first  time  in  his  life,  and  for  the  last,  would  this  service  devolve
on  him.  As  the  pious  old  priest  ministered  within  the  Holy
Place,  he  saw  with  such  distinctness  that  he  could  afterwards
describe  the  very  spot,  Gabriel  standing,  as  if  he  had  just
come  out  from  the  Most  Holy  Place,  between  the  altar  and
the  table  of  shewbread,  "on  the  right  side  of  the  altar."
So  far  as  we  know,  this  was  the  first  and  only  angelic
appearance  in  the  Temple.  For  we  cannot  attach  serious
importance   to   the    tradition    that,    during   the   forty  years

our  A.  V.  See  Bahr's  Symbol,^  vbl.  i,,  and  Keil's  Arch,^  vol.  i.  (Ml  tiiis  and
kindred  subjects.

*  Fsa.  cxli.  2.  2  Luke  i.f9.

'  It  has,  however,  been  suggested  that  the  correct  reading  of  Luke  i.  39,  is  not
•a  city  of  Judah,"  but  ''  the  city  of  Juttah."     Compare  Joshua  xxi.  16.

K


130        The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Serznces.

of  his  pontificate,  an  angel  always  accompanied  Simeon  the
Just,  when  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  he  entered  and  left
the  Most  Holy  Place,  except  the  last  year,  when  the
angel  left  him  in  the  Sanctuary,  to  show  that  this  was  to  be
the  end  of  his  ministry.  What  passed  between  Gabriel  and
Zacharias  is  beside  our  present  purpose.  Suffice  it  to  notice
several  details  incidentally  mentioned  in  this  narrative,  such
as  that  a  special  lot  was  cast  for  this  ministry  ;  that  the  priest
was  alone  in  the  Holy  Place  while  burning  the  incense ;  and
that  "  the  whole  multitude  of  the  people  were  praying  without
at  the  time  of  incense."

The  lot  for  burning  the  incense  was,  as  we  have  seen,
the  third  by  which  the  order  of  the  ministry  for  the  day  was
determined.  The  first  lot,  which  in  reality  had  been  cast
before  the  actual  break  of  day,  was  that  to  designate  the
various  priests  who  were  to  cleanse  the  altar  and  to  prepare  its
fires.  Th^  first  of  the  priests  on  whom  this  lot  had  fallen  imme-
diately went  out.  His  brethren  reminded  him  where  the  silver
chafing-dish  was  deposited,  and  not  to  touch  any  sacred  vessel
till  he  had  washed  his  hands  and  feet.  He  took  no  light  with
him  ;  the  fire  of  the  altar  was  sufficient  for  his  office.  Hands
and  feet  were  washed  by  laying  the  right  hand  on  the  right
foot,  and  the  left  hand  on  the  left.^  The  sound  of  the
machinery,  as  it  filled  the  laver  with  water,  admonished  the
others  to  be  in  readiness.  This  machinery  had  been  made  by
Ben  Catiny  who  also  altered  the  laver  so  that  twelve  priests
could  at  the  same  time  perform  their  ablutions.  Otherwise
the  laver  resembled  that  in  the  Temple  of  Solomon.  It  was
of  brass.      All  the  vessels  in  the  Sanctuary  were  of  metal,

^  Perhaps  this  might  therefore  be  appropriately  described  as  washing  *'  the  fe-et
only,"  John  xiii.  10.


T^e  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.      131

the  only  exception  being  the  altar  of  burnt  offering,
which  was  solid,  and  wholly  of  stones  taken  from  virgin  soil,
that  had  not  been  defiled  by  any  tool  of  iron.  The  stones
were  fastened  together  by  mortar,  pitch,  and  molten  lead.  The
measurement  of  the  altar  is  differently  given  by  Josephus  and
the  Rabbis.  It  seems  to  have  consisted  of  three  sections,
each  narrower  than  the  former  :  the  base  being  thirty-two
cubits  wide,  the  middle  twenty-eight,  and  the  top,  where  the
fire  was  laid  (of  course,  not  including  the  horns  of  the  altar
nor  the  space  where  the  priests  moved),  only  twenty-four
cubits.  With  the  exception  of  some  parts  of  the  altar,  in
which  the  cubit  was  calculated  at  five  hand-breadths,  the
sacred  cubit  of  the  Temple  was  always  reckoned  at  six  hand-
breadths.  Lastly,  as  readers  of  the  New  Testament  know,^
whatever  touched  the  altar,  or,  indeed,  any  sacred  vessel,  was
regarded  as  "  sanctified,"^  but  no  vessel  could  be  dedicated  to
the  use  of  the  Temple  which  had  not  been  originally  destined
for  it.2

But  to  return.  While  the  assistant  priests  were  waiting,
the  first  priest  had  taken  the  silver  chafing-dish,  and  scraped
the  fire  on  the  altar,  removing  the  burnt  coals,  and  depositing
them  at  a  little  distance  north  of  the  altar.  As  he  descended,
the  other  priests  quickly  washed  hands  and  feet,  and  took
shovels  and  prongs,  with  which  they  moved  aside  what  of  the
sacrifices  had  been  left  unburned  from  the  previous  evening,
then  cleaned  out  the  ashes,  laying  part  on  the  great  heap  in
the  middle  of  the  altar,  and  the  rest  in  a  place  whence  it  was

^  Matt,  xxiii.  19.

^  It  is  impossible  in  this  place  to  enter  into  full  details  either  about  the  laver,
the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  or  indeed  any  of  the  vessels  of  the  ministry.  These
and  similar  topics  belong  to  Biblical  archaeology.


132        The   Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

afterwards  carried  out  of  the  Temple.  The  next  duty  was  to
lay  on  the  altar  fresh  wood,  which,  however,  might  be  neither
from  the  olive  nor  the  vine.  For  the  fire  destined  to  feed  the
altar  of  incense  the  wood  of  the  fig-tree  was  exclusively  used,
so  as  to  secure  good  and  sufficient  charcoal.  The  hitherto
unconsumed  pieces  of  the  sacrifice  were  now  again  laid  upon
the  fire.

These  preliminaries  finished,  the  priests  gathered  once  more
for  the  second  lot.  The  priest  on  whom  it  fell  was  designated,
along  with  the  twelve  who  stood  nearest  to  him,  for  offering  the
sacrifice  and  cleansing  the  candlestick  and  the  altar  of  incense.
Immediately  after  casting  this  second  lot,  the  president  directed
one  to  ascend  some  "  pinnacle,"  and  see  whether  it  was  time
to  kill  the  daily  sacrifice.  If  the  priest  reported,  "  The  morn-
ing shineth  already,"  he  was  again  asked,  "  Is  the  sky  lit  up  as
far  as  Hebron  } "  If  so,  the  president  ordered  the  lamb  to
be  brought  from  the  chamber  by  the  Beth-Moked,  where  it
had  been  kept  in  readiness  for  four  days.  Others  fetched
the  gold  and  silver  vessels  of  service,  of  which  the  Rabbis
enumerate  ninety-three.  The  sacrificial  lamb  was  now  watered
out  of  a  golden  bowl,  and  anew  examined  by  torch-light,
though  its  Levitical  fitness  had  been  already  ascertained  the
evening  before.  Then  the  sacrificing  priest,  surrounded  by
his  assistants,  fastened  the  lamb  to  the  second  of  the  rings  on
the  north  side  of  the  altar — in  the  morning  in  the  western,  in
the  evening  in  the  eastern  corner.^  The  sacrifice  was  held
together^  by  its  feet,  the  fore  and  hind  feet  of  each  side
being  tied  together  ;  its  head  was  laid  towards  the  south  and

^  The  sacrifice  was  always  offered  against  the  sun.

^  This  was  a  point  in  dispute  between  the  orthodox  and  the  heterodox.      See
Maimonides^  Yad  ha  Chaz,,  Tr.  On  the  Daily  Sacr,,  chap.  i.  9.


The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.       133

fastened  through  a  ring,  and  its  face  turned  to  the  west,  while
the  sacrificing  priest  stood  on  the  east  side.  The  elders  who
carried  the  keys  now  gave  the  order  for  opening  the  Temple
gates.  As  the  last  great  gate  slowly  moved  on  its  hinges,  the
priests,  on  a  signal  given,  blew  three  blasts  on  their  silver
trumpets,  summoning  the  Levites  and  the  "  representatives  "
of  the  people  (the  so-called  "  stationary  men  ")  to  their  duties,
and  announcing  to  the  city  that  the  morning  sacrifice  was
about  to  be  offered.  Immediately  upon  this  the  great  gates
which  led  into  the  Holy  Place  itself  were  opened  to  admit
the  priests  who  were  to  cleanse  the  candlestick  and  the  altar
of  incense.  The  opening  of  these  gates  was  the  signal  for
actually  slaying  the  sacrificial  lamb.  The  sacrifice  was
offered  in  the  following  manner.  One  priest  drew  forward
the  windpipe  and  gullet  of  the  sacrifice,  and  quickly  thrust
upwards  the  knife,  while  another  caught  the  blood  in  a
golden  bowl.  Standing  at  the  east  side  of  the  altar,  he
sprinkled  it,  first  at  the  north-east,  and  then  at  the  south-
west corner,  below  the  red  line  which  ran  round  the  middle
of  the  altar,  in  each  case  in  such  manner  as  to  cover  two
sides  of  the  altar,  or,  as  it  is  described,  in  the  form  of  the
Greek  letter  F  (gamma).  The  rest  of  the  blood  was  poured
out  at  the  base  of  the  altar.  Ordinarily,  the  whole  of  this
service  would  of  course  be  performed  by  priests.  But  it
was  valid  even  if  the  sacrifice  had  been  killed  by  a  layman,
or  with  an  ordinary  knife.  Not  so  if  the  blood  were  caught
up  in  any  but  a  consecrated  vessel,  or  sprinkled  by  other
than  the  hands  of  a  priest  who  at  the  time  was  Levitically
fit  for  the  service.

We  proceed  to  describe  the  service  of  those  whose  duty
it  was  to  cleanse  the  altar  of  incense  and  to  dress  the  golden


134        'The  Te}itple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

candlestick  in  the  Holy  Place.  A  few  particulars  as  to  each
of  these  will  not  be  out  of  place.  The  triumphal  arch  of
Titus  in  Rome  bears  a  representation  of  the  golden  mortars
in  which  the  incense  was  bruised,  and  of  the  golden  candle-
stick, but  not  of  the  altar  of  incense.  Still,  we  can  form
a  sufficiently  accurate  idea  of  its  appearance.^  It  was  square,
one  cubit  long  and  broad,  and  two  cubits  high,  that  is,  half
a  cubit  higher  than  the  table  of  shewbread,  but  one  cubit
lower  than  the  candlestick,  and  it  had  "  horns  "  at  each  of  its
four  corners.  It  was  probably  hollow,  and  its  top  covered  with
a  golden  plate,  and  like  an  Eastern  roof,  surrounded  by  what
resembled  a  balustrade,  to  prevent  the  coals  and  incense  from
falling  off.  Below  this  balustrade  was  a  massive  crown  of
gold.  The  incense  burned  upon  this  altar  was  prepared  of
the  four  ingredients  mentioned  in  Ex.  xxx.  34,  with  which,
according  to  the  Rabbis,  seven  others  were  mixed,  besides  a
small  quantity  of  "  Ambra,"  and  of  a  herb  which  gave  out  a
dense  smoke.  To  these  thirteen  substances^  salt  was  of
course  added.  The  mode  of  preparing  the  incense  had
been  preserved  in  the  family  of  Abtinas,  The  greatest
care  was  taken  to  have  the  incense  thoroughly  bruised  and
mixed.  Altogether  368  pounds  were  made  for  the  year's
consumption,  about  half  a  pound  being  used  every  morning
and  evening  in  the  service.  The  censer  for  the  Day  of
Atonement  was  different  in  size  and  appearance  from  that
for  ordinary  days.^     The   golden  candlestick  was  like  that

*  See  the  notices  in  the  Mishnah,  and  Maimonides,  and  the  articles  in  the
Encycl.  specially  those  of  Herzog  and  Winer.

2  Jos.  Jewish  War,  v.  5,  s.

^  Here  also  all  details  are  beyond  our  present  province.  But  it  may  be  remarked
that  the  expression  in  Heb.  ix.  4,  rendered  in  our  Authorised  Version  *Svhich  had
the  golden  censer,"  implies  no  more  than  that  the  censer  belonged  to  the  *'  Holiest


The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.       135

delineated  in  Ex.  xxv.  31,  etc,  and  is  sufficiently  known  from
its  representation  on  the  Arch  of  Titus.

Now,  while  one  set  of  priests  were  busy  in  the  Court  of  the
Priests  offering  the  sacrifice,  the  two  on  whom  it  devolved
to  trim  the  lamps  of  the  candlestick  and  to  prepare  the  altar
of  incense  had  gone  into  the  Holy  Place.  As  nearly  as  .
possible  while  the  lamb  was  being  slain  without,  the  first  \
of  these  priests  took  with  his  hands  the  burnt  coals  and  ashes
from  the  golden  altar,  and  put  them  into  a  golden  vessel — •
called  "teni'* — and  withdrew,  leaving  it  in  the  sanctuary.
Similarly,  as  the  blood  of  the  lamb  was  being  sprinkled  on
the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  the  second  priest  ascended  the
three  steps,  hewn  in  stone,  which  led  up  to  the  candlestick.
He  trimmed  and  refilled  the  lamps  that  were  still  burning,
removed  the  wick  and  old  oil  from  those  which  had  become
extinguished,  supplied  fresh,  and  re-lit  them  from  one  of  the
other  lamps.  But  the  large  central  lamp,  towards  which  all
the  others  bent,  and  which  was  called  the  western,  because
it  inclined  westward  towards  the  Most  Holy  Place,  might
only  be  re-lit  by  fire  from  the  altar  itself.  Only  five,  how-
ever, of  the  lamps  were  then  trimmed ;  the  other  two  were
reserved  to  a  later  period  of  the  service.

Meantime  in  the  Court  of  the  Priests  the  sacrifice  had
been  hung  on  one  of  the  hooks,  flayed,  cut  up  according  to
rules,^  cleaned,  and  handed  to  the  six  priests  who  were  suc-
cessively to  carry  up  the  pieces  to  the  rise  of  the  altar,  where
they  were  salted  and  deposited.     For  "  every  sacrifice  must


of  all  ("having  the  golden  censer  *'),  not  that  the  censer  ordinarily  stood  in  the
Most  Holy  Place.

^  These  rules  are  so  detailed  that  the  priests,  on  any  of  whom  the  lot  might  at
any  time  fall  for  this  service,  must  have  undergone  very  careful  previous  training.


136       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

be  salted  with  salt" — nay,  everything  that  was  laid  on  the
altar,  except  the  drink-offering.^  At  the  same  time,  three
other  priests  carried  up  to  the  rise  of  the  altar  the  daily  meat-
offering, that  of  the  high-priest,  and  the  drink-offering.  The
skins  of  the  sacrifices  were  salted,  and  on  the  eve  of  each
Sabbath  distributed  among  the  *'  course  "  of  priests  that  had
been  on  ministry.^

And  now  the  most  solemn  part  of  the  service  was  about
to  begin.  For  the  third  time  the  priests  assembled  in  the
"  Hall  of  Polished  Stones,"  to  draw  the  third  and  the  fourth
lots.  But  before  doing  so  the  president  called  on  them  to
join  in  the  prescribed  prayers.  Tradition  has  preserved  these
to  us.  Subjecting  them  to  the  severest  criticism,^  so  as  to
eliminate  all  later  details,  the  words  used  by  the  priests
before  the  third  and  fourth  lots  were  as  follows :

"  With  great  love  hast  Thou  loved  us,  O  Lord  our  God,
and  with  much  overflowing  pity  hast  Thou  pitied  us.     Our

Father  and  our  King,  for  the  sake  of  our  fathers  who  trusted

in  Thee,  and  Thou  taughtest  them  the  statutes  of  life,  have
mercy  upon  us,  and  enlighten  our  eyes*  [in  Thy  law ;  cause
our  hearts  to  cleave  to  Thy  commandments  ;  unite  our  hearts
to  love  and  to  fear  Thy  name,  and  we  shall  not  be  put  to
shame,  world  without  end.  For  Thou  art  a  God  who  pre-
parest  salvation,  and  us  hast  Thou  chosen  from  among  all
nations  and  tongues,  and  hast,  in  truth,  brought  us  near  to

1  To  this  the  Rabbis  add  somewhat  needlessly :  the  blood  of  sprinkling  and  the
wood  for  the  fire  !

2  This  in  the  case  of  burnt-,  sin-,  and  trespass- offerings.  The  skins  of  the  other
offerings  belonged  to  the  offerers  themselves.

^  Compare  the  very  full  discussion  of  the  subject  in  Zunz,  Gottesd,  Vortr^  pp.
369  and  following.      Still,  the  matter  is  not  quite  clear  of  critical  difficulties.

*  The  words  here  and  afterwards  within  square  brackets  are  regarded  by  Jost
{fiesth,  d»  jfud.)  as  a  later  addition.


The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.       137  *

thy  great  name,  Selah,  in  order]  that  we  in  love  may  praise
Thee  and  Thy  Unity.  Blessed  be  the  Lord,  who  in  love
chose  His  people  Israel."

After  this  prayer  the  ten  commandments  were  (at  one
time)  wont  to  be  repeated,  a  practice  discontinued,  however,
lest  the  Sadducees  should  declare  them  to  be  the  only
essential  part  of  the  law.  Then  all  assembled  said  the
so-called  "Shema"^  (Hear,  O  Israel,  etc.,  Deut.  vi.  4,  etc.),
which  may  be  designated  as  a  sort  of  "  credo  "  or  *'  belief."  It
consisted  of  these  three  passages — Deut.  vi.  4-9 ;  xi.  13-21  ;
and  Numb.  xv.  37-41.

After  this  the  lot  was  cast  for  burning  the  incense.
No  one  might  take  part  in  it  who  had  ministered  in  that
office  before,  unless  in  the  very  rare  case  that  all  present
had  previously  so  officiated.  Hence,  while  the  other  three
lots  held  good  for  the  evening  service,  that  for  the  incense
required  to  be  repeated.  He  on  whom  this  lot  fell  chose
from  among  his  friends  his  two  assistants.  Finally,  the  third
was  succeeded  by  the  fourth  lot,  which  designated  those  who
were  to  lay  on  the  altar  the  sacrifice  and  the  meat-offerings,
and  to  pour  out  the  drink-offering.

The  incensing  priest  and  his  assistants  now  approached
first  the  altar  of  burnt-offering.  One  filled  with  incense  a
golden  censer  held  in  a  silver  vessel,  while  another  placed
in  a  golden  bowl  burning  "coals  from  the  altar.  As  they
passed  from  the  court  into  the  Holy  Place,  they  struck  a
large  instrument  (called  the  "  Magrephah "),  at  sound  of
which   the   priests   hastened  from  all  parts  to  worship,  and

^  So  named  from  the  first  word,  Shema,  "  Hear,"  viz.,  **0  Israel,"  etc.  By
one  of  the  strangest  mistakes,  Lightfoot  confounds  the  contents  of  the  ''  Shema"
with  those  of  the  phylacteries.


13S        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services,

the  Levites  to  occupy  their  places  in  the  service  of  song;
while  the  chief  of  the  "  stationary  men  "  ranged  at  the  Gate
of  Nicanor  such  of  the  people  as  were  to  be  puriified  that
day.^  Slowly  the  incensing  priest  and  his  assistants  ascended
the  steps  to  the  Holy  Place,  preceded  by  the  two  priests  who
had  formerly  dressed  the  altar  and  the  candlestick,  and  who
now  removed  the  vessels  they  had  left  behind,  and,  wor-
shipping, withdrew.  Next,  one  of  the  assistants  reverently
spread  the  coals  on  the  golden  altar  ;  the  other  arranged
the  incense  ;  and  then  the  chief  officiating  priest  was  left
alone  within  the  Holy  Place,  to  await  the  signal  of  the
president  before  burning  the  incense.  It  was  probably  while
thus  expectant  that  the  angel  Gabriel  appeared  to  Zacharias.
As  the  president  gave  the  word  of  command,  which  marked
that  "  the  time  of  incense  had  come,"  "  the  whole  multitude
of  the  people  without "  withdrew  from  the  inner  court,  and
fell  down  before  the  Lord,  spreading  their  hands^  in  silent
y  prayer.  It  is  this  most  solemn  period,  when  throughout  the
vast  Temple  buildings  deep  silence  rested  on  the  worshipping
multitude,  while  within  the  sanctuary  itself  the  priest  laid
the  incense  on  the  golden  altar,  and  the  cloud  of  "odours"^
rose  up  before  the  Lord,  which  serves  as  the  image  of  hea-
venly things  in  this  description  :^  "  And  when  He  had  opened
the  seventh  seal,  there  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the  space

*  The  description  of  the  daily  sacrifice  is  given  at  length  in  the  Mishnic  tractate
Tamid,     See  specially  sect  v.

2  The  practice  of  folding  the  hands  together  in  prayer  dates  from  the  fifth
century  of  our  era,  and  is  of  purely  Saxon  origin.  See  Holemann  Bibel  St.^
i,  p.  150,  quoted  by  Delitzsch,  u,  s.

3  Rev.  V.  8.  It  is  a  curious  inconsistency  on  the  part  of  Maimonides,  to  assign
this  rationalistic  object  for  the  use  of  incense  in  the  Temple — that  it  counteracted
the  effluvia  from  the  sacrifices  I

*  Rev.  viii.  i,  3,  4.  According  to  Tamid  vi.  3,  the  incensing  priest  "bowed
down, "  or  prayed,  on  withdrawing  backwards  from  the  Holy  Place.


The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice,       139

of  half  an  hour.  .  .  .  And  another  angel  came  and  stood  at
the  altar,  having  a  golden  censer ;  and  there  was  given  unto
him  much  incense,  that  he  should  offer  it  with  the  prayers
of  all  saints  upon  the  golden  altar  which  was  before  the
throne.  And  the  smoke  of  the  incense,  which  came  with
the  prayers  of  the  saints,  ascended  up  before  God  out  ot
the  angel's  hand."  The  prayers  offered  by  priests  and  people
at  this  part  of  the  service  are  recorded  by  tradition  as  fol-
lows '}  "True  it  is  that  Thou  art  Jehovah  our  God,  and  the
God  of  our  fathers ;  our  King  and  the  King  of  our  fathers ;
our  Saviour  and  the  Saviour  of  our  fathers  ;  our  Maker  and
the  Rock  of  our  salvation  ;  our  Help  and  our  Deliverer.
Thy  name  is  from  everlasting,  and  there  is  no  God  beside
Thee.  A  new  song  did  they  that  were  delivered  sing  to
Thy  name  by  the  sea-shore  ;  together  did  all  praise  and
own  Thee  as  King,  and  say,  Jehovah  shall  reign  who  saveth
Israel.^

"  Be  graciously  pleased,  Jehovah  our  God,  with  Thy  people

1  A  few  details  for  those  who  wish  fuller  information.  Tradition  has  preserved
two  kinds  of  fragments  from  the  ancient  Jewish  liturgy  in  the  times  of  the  Temple.
The  one  is  called  the  **  Tephillah,"  or  Prayer,  the  other  the  "  Eulogies  "  or  Benedic-  \  j
tions.  Of  the  latter  there  are  eighteen,  of  which  the  three  first  and  the  three  last  IV
are  the  oldest,  though  four,  five,  six,  eight,  and  nine  are  also  of  considerable
antiquity.  Of  the  ancient  Tephilloth  four  have  been  preserved — two  used  before
and  two  (in  the  morning,  one)  after  the  Shema.  The  first  morning  and  the  last
evening  Tephillah  are  strictly  morning  and  evening  prayers.  They  were  not  used
in  the  Temple  service.  The  second  Tephillah  before  the  Shema  was  said  by  the
priests  in  the  **  Hall  of  Polished  Stones,*'  and  the  first  Tephillah  after  the  Shema  by
priests  and  people  during  the  burning  of  incense.  This  was  followed  by  the  three
last  of  the  eighteen  Eulogies.  Is  it  not  a  fair  inference,  then,  that  while  the  priests
said  their  prayers  in  *'the  hall,"  the  people  repeated  the  three  first  Eulogies,  which
are  of  equal  antiquity  with  the  three  last,  which  we  know  to  have  been  repeated
during  the  burning  of  incense  ?

*  Now  follow  in  the  text  the  three  last  '*  Eulogies."


140       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  S^ervices.

Israel,  and  with  their  prayer.  Restore  the  service  to  the
oracle  of  Thy  house  ;  and  the  burnt-offerings  of  Israel  and
their  prayer  accept  graciously  and  in  love  ;  and  let  the  service
of  thy  people  Israel  be  ever  well-pleasing  unto  Thee.

''We  praise  Thee,  who  art  Jehovah  our  God,  and  the  God
of  our  fathers,  the  God  of  all  flesh,  our  Creator,  and  the
Creator  from  the  beginning !  Blessing  and  praise  be  to  Thy
great  and  holy  name,  that  Thou  hast  preserved  us  in  life  and
kept  us.  So  preserve  us  and  keep  us,  and  gather  the  scat-
tered ones  into  Thy  holy  courts,  to  keep  Thy  statutes,  and  to
do  Thy  good  pleasure,  and  to  serve  Thee  with  our  whole
heart,  as  this  day  we  confess  unto  Thee.  Blessed  be  the
Lord,  unto  whom  belongeth  praise.

''Appoint  peace,  goodness,  and  blessing  ;  grace,  mercy,
and  compassion  for  us,  and  for  all  Israel  Thy  people.  Bless
us,  O  our  Father,  all  of  us  as  one,  with  the  light  of  Thy
countenance.  For  in  the  light  of  Thy  countenance  hast
Thou,  Jehovah,  our  God,  given  us  the  law  of  life,  and  loving
mercy,  and  righteousness,  and  blessing,  and  compassion,  and
life,  and  peace.  And  may  it  please  Thee  to  bless  Thy  people
Israel  at  all  times,  and  at  every  hour  with  Thy  peace.  [May
we  and  all  thy  people  Israel  be  remembered  and  written
before  Thee  in  the  book  of  life,  with  blessing  and  peace  and
support]  Blessed  be  Thou,  Jehovah,  who  blessest  Thy  people
Israel  with  peace."

These  prayers  ended,  he  who  had  formerly  trimmed  the
candlestick  once  more  entered  the  Holy  Place,  to  kindle  the
two  lamps  that  had  been  left  unlit ;  and  then,  in  company
with  the  incensing  priest,  took  his  stand  on  the  top  of  the
steps  which  led  down  to   the  Court  of   the  Priests.^      The

^  According  to  Maimonides,  it  was  at  this  part  of  the  service,  and  not  before,


The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.       141

other  three  who  had  also  ministered  within  the  Holy  Place
gathered  beside  him,  still  carrying  the  vessels  of  their
ministry  ;  while  the  rest  of  the  priests  grouped  themselves  on
the  steps  beneath.  Meanwhile  he  on  whom  the  fourth  lot
had  fallen  had  ascended  to  the  altar.  They  whose  duty  it
was  handed  to  him,  one  by  one,  the  pieces  of  the  sacrifice.
Upon  each  he  pressed  his  hands,  and  next  flung  them  con-
fusedly upon  the  fire,  that  so  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  might
be  scattered  as  well  as  its  blood  sprinkled.  After  that  he
ranged  them  in  order,  to  imitate  as  nearly  as  possible  the
natural  shape  of  the  animal.  This  part  of  the  service  was
not  unfrequently  performed  by  the  high-priest  himself.

The  priests,  who  were  ranged  on  the  steps  to  the  Holy  Place,
now  lifted  their  hands  above  their  heads,  spreading  and  join-
ing their  fingers  in  a  peculiar  mystical  manner.*  One  of  their
number,  probably  the  incensing  priest,  repeated  in  audible
voice,  followed  by  the  others,  the  blessing  in  Numb.  vi.
24-26:  ''Jehovah  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee:  Jehovah  make
His  face  shine  upon  thee,  and  be  gracious  unto  thee :
Jehovah  lift  up  His  countenance  upon  thee,  and  give  thee
peace."  To  this  the  people  responded,  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord
God,  the  God  of  Israel,  from  everlasting  to  everlasting."  In
the  modern  synagogues  the  priestly  blessing  is  divided  into


that  the  sound  of  the  Magrephah  summoned  the  priests  to  worship,  the  Levites  to
their  song,  and  the  "stationary  men"  to  their  duties.

1  The  high-priest  lifted  his  hands  no  higher  than  the  golden  plate  on  his  mitre.
It  is  well  known  that,  in  pronouncing  the  priestly  blessing  in  the  synagogue,  the
priests  join  their  two  outspread  hands,  by  making  the  tips  of  the  first  fingers  touch
each  other.  At  the  same  time,  the  first  and  second,  and  the  third  and  fourth
fingers  in  each  hand  are  knit  together,  while  a  division  is  made  between  those
fingers  by  spreading  them  apart.  A  rude  representation  of  this  may  be  s^een  in
Jewish  cemeteries  on  the  gravestones  of  priests.


142        The   Temple,  its  Ministiy  a7td  Services.

three  parts;  it  is  pronounced  with  a  disguised  voice  and
veiled  faces,  while  the  word  "  Lord "  is  substituted  for  the
name  of  '^  Jehovah."  ^  Of  course  all  this  was  not  the  case  in
the  Temple.  But  if  it  had  been  the  duty  of  Zacharias,  as
incensing  priest  for  the  day,  to  lead  in  the  priestly  blessing,
we  can  all  the  better  understand  the  wonder  of  the  people  as
"he  beckoned  unto  them,  and  remained  speechless,"^  while
they  waited  for  his  benediction.

After  the  priestly  blessing  the  meat-offering  was  brought,
and,  as  prescribed  in  the  law,  oil  added  to  it.  Having  been
salted,  it  was  laid  on  the  fire.  Next  the  high-priest's  daily
meat-offering  was  presented,  consisting  of  twelve  cakes  broken
in  halves — twelve  half-cakes  being  presented  in  the  morning,
and  the  other  twelve  in  the  evening.  Finally,  the  appro-
priate drink-offering  was  poured  out  upon  the  foundation  of
the  altar.'

Upon  this  the  Temple  music  began.  It  was  the  duty
of  the  priests,  who  stood  on  the  right  and  the  left  of  the
marble  table  on  which  the  fat  of  the  sacrifices  was  laid,  at
the  proper  time  to  blow  the  blasts  on  their  silver  trumpets.
There  might  not  be  less  than  two  nor  more  than  120  in  this
service  ;  the  former  in  accordance  with  the  original  institu-
tion,* the  latter  not  to  exceed  the  number  at  the  dedication
of  the  first  Temple.^  *rhe  priests  faced  the  people,  looking
eastwards,  while  the  Levites,  who  crowded  the  fifteen  steps
which  led  from  the  Court  of  Israel  to  that  of  the  Priests,

*  Dr.  Geiger  has  an  interesting  argument  to  show  that  in  olden  times  the  pro-
nunciation of  the  so-called  ineffable  name  **  Jehovah,"  which  now  is  never  spoken,
was  allowed  even  in  ordinary  life.     See  Urschrift  u,  Uebers  d,  Bibel,  p.  259,  etc.

2  Luke  1.  22.

3  Perhaps  there  may  be  an  allusion  to  this  in  Rev.  vi.  9,  10.
^  *  Numb.  X.  2.  *  2  Chron.  v.  12.


The  Moi^ning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.      143

turned  westwards  to  the  sanctuary.  On  a  signal  given  by
the  president,  the  priests  moved  forward  to  each  side  of
him  who  struck  the  cymbals.  Immediately  the  choir  of  the
Levites,  accompanied  by  instrumental  music,  began  the  Psalm
of  the  day.  It  was  sustained  by  not  less  than  twelve  voices,
with  which  mingled  the  delicious  treble  from  selected  voices
of  young  sons  of  the  Levites,  who,  standing  by  their  fathers,
might  take  part  in  this  service  alone.  The  number  of  instru-
mental performers  was  not  limited,  nor  yet  confined  to  the
Levites,  some  of  the  distinguished  families  which  had  inter-
married with  the  priests  being  admitted  to  this  service.'^  The
Psalm  of  the  day  was  always  sung  in  three  sections.  At  the
close  of  each  the  priests  drew  three  blasts  from  their  silver
trumpets,  and  the  people  bowed  down  and  worshipped.  This
closed  the  morning  service.  It  was  immediately  followed  by
the  sacrifices  and  offerings  which  private  Israelites  might  have
to  bring,  and  which  would  occasionally  continue  till  near  the
time  for  the  evening  sacrifice.  The  latter  resembled  in  all
respects  that  of  the  morning,  except  that  the  lot  was  only
cast  for  the  incense ;  that  the  incense  was  burned,  not,  as  in
the  morning,  before,  but  after  the  pieces  of  the  sacrifice  had
been  laid  on  the  fire  of  the  altar,  and  that  the  priestly  blessing
was  generally  omitted.

The  following  was  the  order  of  the  Psalms  in  the  daily
service  of  the  Temple.^  On  the  first  day  of  the  week  they
sang  Psalm  xxiv.,  '*The  earth  is  the  Lord's,"  etc.,  in  com-
memoration of  the  first  day  of  creation,  when  "  God  possessed

^  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  of  the  two  families  named  in  the  Talmud  as
admitted  to  this  service,  one — that  of  Tsippariah — should  have  been  **from
Emmaus"  (Luke  xxiv.  13).

*  Tamidf  sect,  vii.,  and  Maimonides  in  Tamid,


144        '^^^  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

the  worlds  and  ruled  in  it*'  On  the  second  day  they  sang
Psalm  xlviJi.,  "  Great  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  praised/'
etc.,  because  on  the  second  day  of  creation  "  the  Lord  divided
his  works,  and  reigned  over  them."  On  the  third  day  they
sang  Psalm  Ixxxii.,  *'  God  standeth  in  the  congregation  of  the
mighty,"  etc.,  ''because  on  that  day  the  earth  appeared,  on
which  aie  the  Judge  and  the  judged."  On  the  fourth  day
Psalm  xciv.  was  sung,  ''O  Lord  God,  to  whom  vengeance
belongeth,"  etc.,  ''  because  on  the  fourth  day  God  made  the
sun,  moon,  and  stars,  and  will  be  avenged  on  those  that
worship  them."  On  the  fifth,  day  they  sang  Psalm  Ixxxi.,
*'  Sing  aloud  unto  God  our  strength,"  etc.,  *'  because  of  the
variety  of  creatures  made  that  day  to  praise  His  name."  On
the  sixth  day  Psalm  xciii.  was  sung,  ''The  Lord  reigneth,"
etc.,  "  because  on  that  day  God  finished  His  works  and  made
man,  and  the  Lord  ruled  over  all  His  works."  Lastly,  on  the
Sabbath  day  they  sang  Psalm  xcii.,  "  It  is  a  good  thing  to
give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,"  etc.,  "  because  the  Sabbath  was
symbolical  of  the  millennial  kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  six
thousand  years'  dispensation,  when  the  Lord  would  reign
over  all,  and  His  glory  and  service  fill  the  earth  with  thanks-
giving."


CHAPTER  IX.

SABBATH  IN  THE  TEMPLE.

••  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath  :  therefore  the
Sgn  of  man  is  Lord  also  of  the  Sabbath." — Mark  ii.  27,  28.

IT  IS  a  beautifully  significant  practice  of  the  modern  Jews,
that,  before  fulfilling  any  special  observance  directed  in
their  Law,  they  always  first  bless  God  for  the  giving  of  it.  One
might  almost  compare  the  idea  underlying  this,  and  much
else  of  a  similar  character  in  the  present  religious  life  of  Israel,
to  the  good  fruits  which  the  soil  of  Palestine  bore  even  during
the  Sabbatical  years,  when  it  lay  untilled.  For  it  is  intended
to  express  that  the  Law  is  felt  not  a  burden,  but  a  gift  of
God  in  which  to  rejoice.  And  this  holds  specially  true  of  the
Sabbath  in  its  Divine  institution,  of  which  it  was  distinctly
said,  **  I  gave  them  My  Sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign  between  Me
and  them,  that  they  might  know  that  I,  Jehovah,  sanctify
them."^  In  the  same  sense,  the  Sabbath  is  called  "a  delight,
the  holy  of  Jehovah,  honourable;"^  and  the  great  burden  of
the  Sabbath-Psalm^  is  that  of  joyous  thanksgiving  unto  God.

*  Ezek.  XX.  12.  ^  Isa.  Iviii.  13.

*  Psa.  xcii.  The  Talmud  discusses  the  question  whether  Psa.  xcii.  bears  refer-
ence to  the  Sabbath  of  creation,  or  to  that  final  Messianic  Sabbath  of  the  Kingdom —
according  to  Rabbi  Akibah,  "  the  day  which  is  wholly  a  Sabbath."   (See  Delitzscb

L


146       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

The  term  Sabbath,  "resting,"  points  to  the  origin  and
meaning  of  the  weekly  festival.  The  Rabbis  hold  that  it
was  not  intended  for  the  Gentiles,  and  most  of  them  trace
the  obligation  of  its  observance  only  to  the  legislation  on
Mount  Sinai.  Nor  is  another  Rabbinical  saying,  that  *'  cir-
cumcision and  the  Sabbath  preceded  the  law,"  inconsistent
with  this.  For  even  if  the  duty  of  Sabbath-observance
had  only  commenced  with  the  promulgation  of  the  law
on  Mount  Sinai,  yet  the  Sabbath-law  itself  rested  on  the
original  "hallowing"  of  the  seventh  day,  when  God  rested
from  all  His  works. ^  But  this  was  not  the  only  rest
to  which  the  Sabbath  pointed.  There  was  also  a  rest  of
redemption,  and  the  Sabbath  was  expressly  connected  with
the  deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt.  "  Remember  that
thou  wast  a  servant  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  that  Jehovah
thy  God  brought  thee  out  thence  through  a  mighty  hand
and  by  a  stretched  out  arm :  therefore  Jehovah  thy  God
commanded  thee  to  keep  the  Sabbath-day."^  At  the  close
of  the  work-a-day  week,  holy  rest  in  the  Lord  ;  at  the  end
of  the  labour  and  sorrow  of  Egypt,  redemption  and  rest ;
and  both  pointing  forward  to  the  better  rest,^  and  ultimately
to  the  eternal  Sabbath  of  completed  work,  of  completed
redemption,  and  completed  "hallowing"*  —  such  was  the
meaning  of  the  weekly  Sabbath.  It  was  because  this  idea.
of  festive  rest  and  sanctification  was  so  closely  connected
with  the  weekly  festival   that  the   term    Sabbath  was    also

on  the  Psalm. )  It  is  a  curiously  uncritical  remark  of  some  Rabbis  to  ascribe  the
authorship  of  this  Psalm  to  Adam,  and  its  composition  to  the  beginning  of  the  first
Sabbath — Adam  having  fallen  just  before  its  commencement,  and  been  driven  from
Paradise,  but  not  killed,  because  God  would  not  execute  the  punishment  of  death
on  the  Sabbath.

1  Gen.  ii.  3.  «  Deut.  v.  15.  *  Heb.  iv.  9.  *  Rev.  xl


Sabbath  in  the  Temple.  147

applied  to  the  great  festivals.^  For  a  similar  reason,  the
number  seven,  which  was  that  of  the  weekly  Sabbath  (the
first  seven  that  had  appeared  in  time),  became  in  Scripture-
symbolism  the  sacred  or  covenant-number.  ^

It  is  necessary  to  bear  all  this  in  remembrance  when
thinking  of  what  the  perverted  ingenuity  of  the  Rabbis
made  the  Sabbath  at  the  time  of  Christ,  and  probably
even  more  in  the  generations  following.  For  there  is  evi-
dence that  the  Sabbath-law  has  become  stricter  than  it
had  been,  since,  for  instance,  the  practice  of  taking  an  ox
or  an  ass  out  of  a  pit,  to  which  our  Saviour  alludes^  as
uncontroverted,  would  now  no  longer  be  lawful,  unless,
indeed,  the  animal  were  in  actual  danger  of  life ;  other-
wise, it  is  to  receive  food  and  water  in  the  pit.  This
**  actual  danger  to  life,*'  whether  to  beast  or  to  man  (at  any
rate,  to  Israelites),  determined  the  only  cases  in  which  a
breach  of  the  law  of  Sabbath -observance  was  allowed.  At
the  outset,  indeed,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  whole  social
Rabbinical  legislation  on  the  subject  seems  to  rest  on  two
sound  underlying  principles :  negatively,  the  avoidance  of  all
that  might  become  work ;  and,  positively,  the  doing  of  all
which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Rabbis,  might  tend  to  make  the
Sabbath  "a  delight."  Hence,  not  only  were  fasting  and
mourning  strictly  prohibited,  but  food,  dress,  and  every
manner  of  enjoyment,  not  incompatible  with  abstinence  from

*  As  Lev.  xxiiL  15,  24,  32,  39.

*  The  term  "  Sabbath"  is  also  applied  to  **  a  week,"  as  m  Lev.  xxiii.  15  ;  xxv.  8 ;
and,  for  example,  in  Matt,  xxviii.  I  ;  Mark  xvi.  2 ;  Luke  xxiv.  I ;  John  xx.  I.
This  seems  to  indicate  that  the  Sabbath  was  not  to  be  regarded  as  separate  from,
but  as  giving  its  character  to  the  rest  of  the  week,  and  to  its  secular  engage-
ments.    So  to  speak,  the  week  closes  and  is  completed  in  the  Sabbath.

'  Luke  xiv.  5.


148        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

work,  were  prescribed  to  render  the  day  pleasurable.  "  All  the
days  of  the  week,"  the  Rabbis  say,  "  has  God  paired,  except  the
Sabbath,  which  is  alone,  that  it  may  be  wedded  to  Israel."
Israel  was  to  welcome  the  Sabbath  as  a  bride  ;  its  advent  as
that  of  a  king.  But  in  practice  all  this  terribly  degenerated.
Readers  of  the  New  Testament  know  how  entirely,  and  even
cruelly,  the  spirit  and  object  of  the  Sabbath  were  perverted
by  the  traditions  of  "  the  elders."  But  those  only  who  have
studied  the  Jewish  law  on  the  subject  can  form  any  adequate
conception  of  the  state  of  matters.  Not  to  speak  of  the  folly
of  attempting  to  produce  joy  by  prescribed  means,  nor  of  the
incongruousness  of  those  means,  considering  the  sacred  cha-
racter of  the  day,  the  almost  numberless  directions  about
avoiding  work  must  have  made  a  due  observance  of  the  Sab-
bath-rest  the  greatest  labour  of  all.  All  work  was  arranged
under  thirty-nine  chief  classes,  or  *'  fathers,"  each  of  them
having  ever  so  many  "  descendants,"  or  subordinate  divisions.
Thus,  *'  reaping  "  was  one  of  the  "  fathers,"  or  chief  classes,
and  **  plucking  ears  of  corn  "  one  of  its  descendants.  So  far
did  this  punctiliousness  go  that  it  became  necessary  to  devise
ingenious  means  to  render  the  ordinary  intercourse  of  life
possible,  and  to  evade  the  inconvenient  strictness  of  the  law
which  regulated  a  "  Sabbath-day's  journey."  ^

The  school  of  Shammai,  the  sect  of  the  Essenes,  and  strange
to  say,  the   Samaritans,   were   the   most   stringent  in  their

*  By  depositing  a  meal  of  meat  at  the  end  of  a  Sabbath-day's  journey  to  make
it,  by  a  legal  fiction,  a  man's  domicile,  from  which  he  might  start  on  a  fresh
Sabbath-day's  jom'ney.  The  Mishnic  tractate  Eruvin  treats  of  the  connecting
of  houses,  courts,  etc.,  to  render  lawful  the  carrying  out  of  food,  etc.  On  the
other  hand,  such  an  isolated  expression  occurs  {Mechilta^  ed.  Weiss^  p.  1\Q  a)  :
"The  Sabbath  is  given  to  you,  not  you  to  the  Sabbath."  If  we  might  regard  this
as  a  current  theological  saying,  it  would  give  a  fresh  meaning  to  the  words  of
cur  Lord,  Mark  ii.  27,


Sabbath  in  the   Temple.  149

Sabbath-observance.  The  school  of  Shammai  held  that  the
duty  of  Sabbath-rest  extended  not  only  to  men  and  to  beasts,
but  even  to  inanimate  objects,  so  that  no  process  might  be
commenced  on  the  Friday  which  would  go  on  of  itself  during
the  Sabbath,  such  as  laying  out  flax  to  dry,  or  putting  wool
into  dye.^  The  school  of  Hillel  excluded  inanimate  things
from  the  Sabbath-rest,  and  also  allowed  work  to  be  given  on
a  Friday  to  Gentiles,  irrespective  of  the  question  whether  they
could  complete  it  before  the  Sabbath  began.  Both  schools
allowed  the  preparation  of  the  passover-meal  on  the  Sabbath,
and  also  priests,  while  on  their  ministry  in  the  Temple,  to
keep  up  the  fire  in  the  ''  Beth  Moked."  But  this  puncti-
lious enforcement  of  the  Sabbath-rest  became  occasionally
dangerous  to  the  nation.  For  at  one  time  the  Jew^s  would
not  even  defend  themselves  on  the  Sabbath  against  hostile
attacks  of  armies,  till  the  Maccabees  laid  down  the  principle,
which  ever  afterwards  continued  in  force,^  that  defensive,
though  not  offensive,  warfare  was  lawful  on  the  holy  day.
Even  as  thus  modified,  the  principle  involved  peril,  and
during  the  last  siege  of  Jerusalem  it  was  not  uniformly  carried
out.'^  Nor  w^as  it,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  from  analogy,^
sanctioned  by  Scripture  precedent.  But  this  is  not  the  place
further  to  explain  either  the  Scripture  or  the  Rabbinical  law
of  Sabbath-observance,^  as  it  affected  the  individual,  the
home,  and  the  social  life,  nor  yet  to  describe  the  Sabbath-
w^orship  in  the  ancient  synagogues  of  Palestine.  We  confine
our  attention  to  what  passed  in  the  Temple  itself.

^  Shabb,  i.  5,  6,  etc.  *  Jos.  Ant,  xii.  6,  2  ;  xiv.  4,  2.

^  Compare  Jewish  Wars^  ii.  19,  2,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  Antiq,  xiv.  4,  2*

*  Josh,  vi.^15,  etc.

•  There  is  a  special  Mishnic  tractate  on  the  subject.


150       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services,

The  only  directions  given  in  Scripture  for  the  celebration  of
the  Sabbath  in  the  sanctuary  are  those  which  enjoin  **  a  holy
convocation,"  or  a  sacred  assembly  ;^  the  weekly  renewal  of
the  shewbread;^  and  an  additional  burnt  offering  of  two
lambs,  with  the  appropriate  meat  and  drink  offerings,  "  beside
the  continual "  (that  is,  the  ordinary  daily)  "  burnt  offering
and  his  drink  offering/'^  But  the  ancient  records  of  tradition
enable  us  to  form  a  very  vivid  conception  of  Sabbath-worship
in  the  Temple  at  the  time  of  Christ.  Formally,  the  Sabbath
commenced  at  sunset  on  Friday,  the  day  being  reckoned  by
the  Hebrews  from  sunset  to  sunset.  As  no  special  hour  for
this  was  fixed,  it  must,  of  course,  have  varied  not  only  at
different  seasons,  but  in  different  localities.  Thus,  the  Rabbis
mention  that  the  inhabitants  of  a  low-lying  city,  like  Tiberias,
comrr.enced  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  half  an  hour  earlier,
while  those  who  lived  on  an  eminence,  such  as  at  Sepphoris,^
Continued  it  half  an  hour  later  than  their  brethren.  .  If  the
sun  were  not  visible,  sunset  was  to  be  reckoned  from  when  the
fowls  went  to  roost.  But  long  before  that  the  preparations
for  the  Sabbath  had  commenced.  Accordingly,  Friday  is
called  by  the  Rabbis  "  the  eve  of  the  Sabbath,"  and  in  the
Gospels  *'  the  preparation."  ^  No  fresh  business  was  then  under-
taken ;  no  journey  of  any  distance  commenced  ;  but  every-
thing purchased  and  made  ready  against  the  feast,  the  victuals

^  Lev.  xxiii.  3.         2  Lev.  xxiv.  8 ;  Numb.  iv.  7.         ^  Numb,  xxviii.  9,  10.

^  Sepphoris,  the  Dio-Caesarea  of  the  Romans,  was  near  Nazareth.  It  is  often
referred  to  by  Josephus,  and,  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  became  for  a  time
the  seat  of  the  Sanhedrim.     (See  Robinson's  Researches  in  Pal.  voJ.  ii.  p.  345.)

^  Mark  xv.  42  ;  John  xix,  31.  The  expression,  Luke  vi.  I,  rendered  in  our
version  "the  second  Sabbath  after  the  first,"  really  means,  **the  first  Sabbath  after
the  second  "  day  of  the  Passover,  on  which  the  first  ripe  sheaf  was  presen  ed,  the
Jews  calculating  the  weeks  from  that  day  to  Pentecost,


Sabbath  in  the  Temple.  151

being  placed  in  a  heated  oven,  and  surrounded  by  dry  sub-
stances to  keep  them  warm.^  Early  on  Friday  afternoon,  the
new  ''  course ''  of  priests,  of  Levites,  and  of  the  "  stationary
men,"  who  were  to  be  the,  representatives  of  all  Israel,  arrived
in  Jerusalem,  and  having  prepared  themselves  for  the  festive
season,  went  up  to  the  Temple.  The  approach  of  the  Sab-
bath, and  then  its  actual  commencement,  were  announced  by
threefold  blasts  from  the  priests'  trumpets.^  The  first  three
blasts  were  drawn  when  "  one-third  of  the  evening  sacrifice  ser-
vice was  over  ;"  or,  as  we  gather  from  the  decree  by  which  the
Emperor  Augustus  set  the  Jews  free  from  attendance  in  courts
of  law,^  about  the  ninth  hour,  that  is,  about  three  P.M.  on
Friday.  This,  as  we  remember,  was  the  hour  when  Jesus  gave  up
the  ghost.^  When  the  priests  for  the  first  time  sounded  their
trumpets,  all  business  was  to  cease,  and  every  kind  of  work  to
be  stopped.  Next,  the  Sabbath-lamp,  of  which  even  heathen
writers  knew,^  was  lit,  and  the  festive  garments  put  on.  A
second  time  the  priests  drew  a  threefold  blast  to  indicate  that
the  Sabbath  had  actually  begun.  But  the  service  of  the  new
*'  course  "  of  priests  had  commenced  before  that.  After  the
Friday  evening  sacrifice,  the  altar  of  burnt  ofi*ering  was  cleansed
from  its  stains  of  blood.^  Then  the  outgoing  '*  course "
handed  over  to  the  incoming  the  keys  of  the  sanctuary,  the

*  See  the  disquisition  m  Mishnah,  Shab,  iv.,  as  to  what  substances  are  lawful  for
the  purpose,  and  what  not.

*  Perhaps  from  the  so-called  **  tectum  Sabbathi,"  or  **  Sabbath  roof,"  which
Rhenferdius  {Op,  Phil.,  p.  770)  identifies  with  the  **  Sabbath  covert,''  2  Kings
xvi.  18.     See  Goodwin,  Moses  et  Aaron  (ed.  Hottinger),  pp.  518,  519.

3  Jos.  Ant  xvi.  6,  2.  *  Matt,  xxvii.  45  ;  Mark  xv.  34  ;  Luke  xxiii.  44.

^  Seneca,  ep.  95.

^  The  altar  was  whitened  twice  a  year,  before  the  Passover-  and  the  Feast  of
Tabernacles.     But  no  tool  of  iron  was  used  in  this.


152        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

holy  vessels,  and  all  else  of  which  they  had  had  charge.
Next  the  heads  of  the  "  houses  "  or  families  of  the  incoming
"course"  determined  by  lot  which  of  the  families  were  to
serve  on  each  special  day  of  their  week  of  ministry,  and  also
who  were  to  discharge  the  various  priestly  functions  on  the
Sabbath.

The  first  of  these  functions,  immediately  on  the  com-
mencement of  the  Sabbath,  was  the  renewal  of  the  **  shew-
bread."  It  had  been  prepared  by  the  incoming  course  before
the  Sabbath  itself,  and — we  might  almost  say,  invariably —
in  one  of  the  chambers  of  the  Temple,  though,  in  theory,
it  was  held  lawful  to  prepare  it  also  at  Bethphage.^  For,
although  it  was  a  principle  that  '*  there  is  no  Sabbath  in  the
sanctuary,"  yet  no  work  was  allowed  which  might  have  been
done  on  any  other  day.  Even  circumcision,  which,  like  the
Temple  services,  according  to  the  Rabbis,  superseded  the
Sabbath,  was  deferred  by  some  to  the  close  of  the  festive
day.^  Hence,  also,  if  Friday,  on  the  afternoon  of  which  the
shewbread  was  ordinarily  prepared,  fell  on  a  feast  day  that
required  Sabbatical  rest,  the  shewbread  was  prepared  on  the
Thursday  afternoon.^  The  Rabbis  are  at  pains  to  explain  the
particular  care  with  which  it  was  made  and  baked,  so  that
in  appearance  and  colour  the  lower  should  be  exactly  the
same  as  the  upper  part  of  it.

But  this  subject  is  too  important  to  be  thus  briefly
treated.'*  Our  term  "  shewbread "  is  a  translation  of  that
used    by   Luther    (Schaubrod),   which,   in    turn,    may   have

*  Mish,  Men,  xi.  2.  •  See  Oehler  in  Herzog's  Real-Encycl.  xiii.  p.  202.
'  This  must  have  been  the  case  on  the  Thursday  of  Christ's  betrayal.

*  The  articles  in  Kitto's  Cyd,  and  in  Smith's  Did.  are  meagre  and  unsatisfactory.
Even  Winer  [fieal-Worterb,  ii.  p.  401,  etc.)  is  not  so  accurate  as  usual.


Sabbath  in  the  Temple.  153

been  taken  from  the  Vulgate  {panes  prcepositionis).  The
Scriptural  name  is  **  Bread  of  the  Face;"'  that  is,  "of  the
presence  of  God,"  just  as  the  similar  expression,  "Angel
of  the  Face"^  means  the  "Angel  of  His  Presence."^  From
its  constant  presence  and  disposition  in  the  sanctuary,  it  is
also  called  "perpetual  bread  "^  and  "bread  of  laying  out"
(set  in  order),  which  latter  most  nearly  corresponds  to  the
term  used  in  the  New  Testament.^  The  placing  and  w^eekly
renewal  of  the  "  Bread  of  the  Presence  "  was  evidently  among
the  principal  Temple  services.^  The  "  table  of  shewbread  "
stood  along  the  northern,  or  most  sacred  side  of  the  Holy  Place,
being  ranged  lengthways  of  the  Temple,  as  all  its  furniture
was,  except  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  which  stood  broadways.
As  described  by  the  Rabbis,  and  represented  on  the
triumphal  Arch  of  Titus  at  Rome,  the  table  of  shewbread
was  two  cubits  long  (two  cubits  =  three  feet),  one  cubit
broad,  and  one  and  a  half  highJ  It  was  made  of  pure
gold,  the  feet  being  turned  out  and  shaped  to  represent  those
of  animals,  and  the  legs  connected,  about  the  middle,  by  a
golden  plate,  which  was  surrounded  by  a  "  crown,"  or  wreath,
while  another  wreath  ran  round  the  top  of  the  table.  Thus
far  its  form  was  the  same  as  that  made  at  the  first  for  the
tabernacle,^  which  was  of  shittim-wood,  overlaid  with  gold.

^  Ex.  XXV.  30  ;  XXXV.  13  ;  xxxix.  36.  ^  Isa.  Ixiii.  9.

3  The  curious  explanation  of  the  Rabbis  (Misk.  Men,  xi.  4)  that  it  was  called
**  Bread  of  the  Faces"  because  it  was  equally  baked  all  round,  as  it  were,  all
**  faces,"  needs  no  refutation.

*  Numb.  iv.  7.       ^  Matt.  xii.  4 ;  Luke  vi.  4;  Heb.  ix.  2.    ^  2  Chron.  xiii.  10,  11.

■^  The  table  on  the  Arch  of  Titus  seems  only  one  cubit  high.  We  know  that  it
was  placed  by  the  victor  in  the  Temple  of  Peace  ;  was  carried  about  the  middle  of
the  fifth  century  to  Africa,  by  the  Vandals  under  Genseric,  and  that  Belisarius
brought  it  back  in  520  to  Constantinople,  wiieuce  it  was  sent  to  Jerusalem.

®  Ex,  XXV   23,  eto.


154        ^'^^  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services

The  *' table"  originally  provided  for  the  second  Temple  had
been  taken  away  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (about  170  B.C.);
but  another  was  supplied  by  the  Maccabees.  Josephus  tells
a  story  ^  about  the  gift  of  yet  another  and  most  splendid  one
by  Ptolemy  Philadelphus.  But  as  its  description  does  not
tally  with  the  delineations. on  the  Arch  of  Titus,  we  infer
that  at  the  time  of  Christ  the  '*  table "  of  the  Maccabees
stood  in  the  Holy  Place.^

Considerable  doubt  exists  as  to  the  precise  meaning  of  the
terms  used  in  Scripture  to  describe  the  golden  vessels  con-
nected with  the  "table  of  shewbread."^  The  "dishes"  are
generally  regarded  as  those  on  which  the  "  shewbread  "  was
either  carried  or  placed,  the  "spoons"  as  destined  for  the
incense,  and  the  "  covers,"  or  rather  "  flagons,"  and  the  "  bowls"
for  the  wine  of  the  drink-offering.  On  the  Arch  of  Titus  there
are  also  two  urns.  But  all  this  does  not  prove,  in  the  silence
of  Scripture,  and  against  the  unanimous  testimony  of  tra-
dition, that  either  flagons,  or  bowls,  or  urns  were  placed  on  the
table  of  shewbread,  nor  that  drink-offerings  were  ever  brought
into  the  "Holy  Place."  ^  On  the  other  hand,  the  Rabbis
regard  the  Hebrew  terms,  rendered  "covers"  and  " bowls,'"
as  referring  to  hollow  golden  tubes  which  were  placed  between
the  shewbread  so  as  to  allow  the  air  to  circulate  between
them  ;  three  of  these  tubes  being  always  put  under  each,
except  the  highest,  under  which  there  were  only  two,  while
the  lowest  rested  on  the  table  itself,  or,  rather,  on  a  golden
dish  upon  it.     Thus  they  calculate  that  there  were,  in  all,

1  A7it.  xii.  2,  8.

'^  Winer  has,  on  other  grounds,  thrown  doubt  on  the  account  of  Josephus.

^  Ex.  XXV.  29.

^  We  cannot  here  enter  into  the  discussion,  which  the  reader  will  find  in  Relan-

dus,  Aiitiq.,  pp.  39,  41.


Sabbath  in  the   Temple.  155

twenty-eight  of  these  tubes  to  support  the  twelve  loaves.
The  "  tubes  "  were  drawn  out  each  Friday,  and  again  inserted
between  the  new  shewbread  each  Sunday,  since  the  task  of
removing  and  reinserting  them  was  not  among  those  labours
which  made  "void  the  Sabbath."  Golden  dishes,  in  which
the  shewbread  was  carried,  and  golden  lateral  plates,  further
to  protect  it  on  the  stand,  are  also  mentioned  by  the  Rabbis.
The  "  shewbread  "  was  made  of  the  finest  wheaten  flour,
that  had  been  passed  through  eleven  sieves.  There  were
twelve  of  these  cakes,  according  to  the  number  of  the  tribes
of  Israel,  ranged  in  two  piles,  each  of  six  cakes.  Each  cake
was  made  of  two  omers  of  wheat  (the  omer  =  about  five
pints).  Between  the  tw^o  rows,  not  upon  them  (as  according  to
the  Rabbis),^  two  bowls  with  pure  incense  were  placed,  and,
according  to  Egyptian  tradition,^  also  salt.  The  cakes  were
anointed  in  the  middle  with  oil,  in  the  form  of  a  cross.  As
described  by  Jewish  tradition,  they  were  each  five  hand-
breadths  broad  and  ten  handbreadths  long,  but  turned  up
at  either  end,  two  handbreadths  on  each  side,  to  resemble
in  outline  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant.  Thus,  as  each  cake,
after  being  *^  turned  up,"  reached  six  handbreadths  and
was  placed  lengthwise  on  the  breadth  of  the  table,  it
would  exactly  cover  it  (the  one  cubit  of  the  table  being
reckoned  at  six  handbreadths) ;  while,  as  the  two  rows  of  six
cakes  stood  broadwise  against  each  other  (2x5  hand-
breadths), it  would  leave  between  them  two  handbreadths
vacant  on  the  length  of  the  table  (2  cubits  =  12  hand-
breadths), on  which  the  two  bowls  with  the  incense  were
placed.^     The  preparation  of  the  shewbread  seems  to  have

1  Menach.  xi.  5.  ^  LXX.  Lev.  xxiv.  7  ;  Philo  ii.  15 1.

•  We  have  been  thus  particular  on  account  of  the  inaccuracies  in  so  many  articles


156       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  a7id  Services.

been  hereditarily  preserved  as  a  secret  family  tradition  in
**the  house  of  Garmu,"  a  family  of  the  Kohathites.^  The
fresh  cakes  of  shewbread  were  deposited  in  a  golden  dish  on
the  marble  table  in  the  porch  of  the  sanctuary,  where  they
remained  till  the  Sabbath  actually  commenced.

The  mode  of  changing  the  shewbread  may  be  given  in  the
words  of  the  Mishnah '?  ''  Four  priests  enter  (the  Holy  Place),  two
carrying,  each,  one  of  the  piles  (of  six  shewbread),  the  other
two  the  two  dishes  (of  incense).  Four  priests  had  preceded
them — two  to  take  off  the  two  (old)  piles  of  shewbread,  and
two  the  two  (old)  dishes  of  incense.  Those  who  brought  in
(the  bread  and  incense)  stood  at  the  north  side  (of  the  table),
facing  southwards  ;  they  who  took  away  at  the  south  side,
facing  north :  these  lifted  off,  and  those  replaced  ;  the  hands
of  these  being  right  over  against  the  hands  of  those  (so  as  to
lift  off  and  put  on  exactly  at  the  same  moment),  as  it  is
written :  *  Thou  shalt  set  upon  the  table  bread  of  the  Presence
before  Me  alway.'  "  The  shewbread  which  had  been  taken
off  was  then  deposited  on  the  golden  table  in  the  porch  of  the
sanctuary,  the  incense  burnt  on  that  heap  on  the  altar  of
burnt  offering  from  which  the  coals  were  taken  for  the  altar  of
incense,  after  which  the  shewbread  was  distributed  among  the
outgoing  and  the  incoming  course  of  priests.'  The  incoming
priests  stood  at  the  north  side,  the  outgoing  at  the  south  side,
and  each  course  gave  to  the  high-priest  half  of  their  portion.


on  this  subject.  It  ought  to  be  stated  that  another  Mishnic  authority  than  that  we
have  followed  seems  to  have  calculated  the  cubit  at  ten  handbreadths,  and  accord-
ingly gives  different  measurements  for  the  **  shewbread  ;"  but  the  result  is  substan-
tially the  same.

1  I  Chron.  ix.  32  ;  Mish,  Shekal,  v.  I.  «  Men.  xi.  7.

^  According  to  other  authorities,  however,  the  incense  of  the  shewbread  was
burned  along  with  the  morning  sacrifice  on  the  Sabbath.


Sabbath  in  the   Temple.  157

The  shewbread  was  eaten  during  the  Sabbath,  and  in  the
Temple  itself,  but  only  by  such  priests  as  were  in  a  state  of
Levitical  purity.

The  importance  of  the  service  which  has  just  been
described  depended,  of  course,  on  its  meaning.  Ancient
symbolism,  both  Jewish  and  Christian,  regarded  "  the  bread
of  the  Presence  *'  as  an  emblem  of  the  Messiah.  This  view  is
substantially,  though  not  literally,  correct.  Jehovah,  who
dwelt  in  the  Most  Holy  Place  between  the  Cherubim,  was
the  God  manifest  and  worshipped  in  the  Holy  Place.  There
the  mediatorial  ministry,  in  the  name  of,  and  representing
Israel,  "laid  before"  Him  the  bread  of  the  Presence,  kindled
the  seven-lamped  candlestick,  and  burnt  incense  on  the
golden  altar.  The  "  bread "  *'  laid  before  Him "  in  the
northern  or  most  sacred  part  of  the  Holy  Place  was  that  of
His  Presence,  and  meant  that  the  Covenant-people  owned
"  His  Presence  '*  as  their  bread  and  their  life  ;  the  candlestick,
that  He  was  their  Lightgiver  and  Light ;  while  between  the
table  of  shewbread  and  the  candlestick  burned  the  incense  on
the  golden  altar,  to  show  that  life  and  light  are  joined  together,
and  come  to  us  in  fellowship  with  God  and  prayer.  For  a
similar  reason,  pure  incense  was  placed  between  the  shew-
bread— for,  the  life  which  is  in  His  Presence  is  one  of  praise ;
while  the  incense  was  burned  before  the  shewbread  was  eaten
by  the  priests,  to  indicate  God's  acceptance  and  ratification  of
Israel's  dependence  upon  Him,  as  also  to  betoken  praise  to  God
while  living  upon  His  Presence.  That  this  "Presence"  meant
the  special  manifestation  of  God,  as  afterwards  fully  vouch-
safed in  Christ,  "the  Angel  of  His  Presence,"  it  is  scarcely
necessary  to  explain  at  length  in  this  place.

But   although   the   service   of  the   incoming   *' course"  of


158       T^he  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

priests  had  begun  with  the  renewal  of  the  "  shewbread,"  that
of  the  outgoing  had  not  yet  completely  ceased.     In  point  of
fact,  the  outgoing  "  course "  of  priests  oflfered  the  morning
sacrifice   on   the   Sabbath,   and    the   incoming   the   evening
sacrifice,  both  spending  the  Sabbath  in  the  sanctuary.     The
inspection  of  the  Temple  before  the  Sabbath  morning  service
differed  from  that  on  ordinary  days,  inasmuch  as  the  Temple
itself  was  lit  up  to  obviate  the  necessity  of  the  priests  carry-
ing  torches   on   the  holy  day.     The  altar  of  burnt  offering
was    cleansed    before    the    usual    hour ;    but    the    morning
service   commenced   later,   so  as  to   give  an   opportunity  of
attending  to  as   many  as  possible.      All  appeared   in  their
festive  garments,  and  each  carried  in  his  hand  some  contribu-
tion for  religious  purposes.     It  was  no  doubt  from  this  that
the   practice  was  derived  of  "  laying  by  in  store  upon  the
first  day  of  the  week,"  which  St.  Paul  recommended  to  the
Corinthians.^     Similarly,  the  apostolic  practice  of  partaking
the  Lord's  Supper  every  Lord's-day  may  have  been  in  imita-
tion  of  the   priests    eating    the    shewbread    every   Sabbath.
The  Sabbath  service  was  in  every  respect   the  same  as  on
other  days,  except  that  at  the  close  of  the  ordinary  morning
sacrifice  the  additional  offering  of  two  lambs,  with  its  appro-
priate meat-  and  drink-ofTerings,    was  brought.^     When  the
drink-ofTering  of  the  ordinary  morning  sacrifice  was  poured
out,  the  Levites  sang  Psa.  xcii.  in  three  sections,  the  priests
drawing,  at  the  close  of  each,  three  blasts  from  their  trumpets,
and  the  people  worshipping.  At  the  close  of  the  additional  Sab-
bath sacrifice,  when  its  drink-offering  was  brought,  the  Levites
sang  the  "  Song  of  Moses  "  in  Deut.  xxxii.    This  "  hymn  "  was
divided  into  six  portions,  for  as  many  Sabbaths  (ver.   I~6 ;

*  I  Cor.  xvi.  I,  2.  *  Numb,  xxviii.  9,  10.


Sabbath  in  the  Temple.  159

7^-12;  13-18;  19-28;  29-39;  40-end).  Each  portion
was  sung  in  three  sections  with  threefold  blasts  of  the
priests'  trumpets,  the  people  worshipping  at  each  pause.  If
a  Sabbath  and  a  "new  moon**  fell  on  the  same  day,  the
Sabbath  hymn  was  sung  in  preference  to  that  for  the  new
moon  ;  if  a  feast  day  fell  on  the  Sabbath,  the  Sabbath
sacrifice  was  offered  before  that  prescribed  for  the  day.  At
the  evening  sacrifice  on  the  Sabbath  the  song  of  Moses  in
Exod-  XV.  was  sung.

Though  not  strictly  connected  with  the  Temple  services,  it
may  be  desirable  briefly  to  refer  to  the  observance  of  the
Sabbatical  year,  as  it  was  strictly  enforced  at  the  time  of
Christ.  It  was  otherwise  with  the  year  of  Jubilee.  Strangely,
there  are  traces  of  the  latter  during  the  period  before  the
return  from  Babylon,^  while  the  Sabbatical  year  seems  to
have  been  systematically  neglected.  Hence  Jewish  tradition
explains,  in  accordance  with  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21,  that  the
seventy  years*  captivity  were  intended  to  make  up  the
neglected  Sabbatical  years — commencing  the  calculation,  if  it
be  taken  literally,  from  about  the  accession  of  King  Solomon.
But  while,  after  the  return  from  Babylon,  the  year  of  Jubilee
was  no  longer  kept,  at  least,  as  a  religious  ordinance,  the  Sab-
batical year  was  most  strictly  observed,  not  only  by  the  Jews,^
but  also  by  the  Samaritans.^  Jewish  tradition  has  it,  that  as
it  took  seven  years  for  the  first  conquest,  and  other  seven
for  the  proper  division  of  the  Holy  Land,  "  tithes  **  were  for

*  I  Kings  xxi.  3;    Isa.  v.   8;   xxxvii.   30;  Ixi.    1-3;   Ezek.   L    i;   vii.    12;
Micah  ii.  2.

*  Neh.  X.  31  ;  I  Mace.  vi.  49,  53 ;  Jos.  Antiq,  xiii.  8,  I ;  xiv.  10,  6 ;  xv.  I,  2 ;

Jew,  IVarSy  i.  2-4.
'  Antiq.  xi.  8,  6.


i6o       The  Tonple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

the  first  time  paid  fourteen  years  after  the  entrance  of  Israel
into  Canaan ;  and  the  first  Sabbatical  year  fell  seven  years
later,  or  in  the  twenty-first  year  of  their  possession  of
Palestine.  The  Sabbatical  law  extended  only  to  the  soil  of
Palestine  itself,  which,  however,  included  certain  surrounding
districts.  The  Rabbis  add  this  curious  proviso,  that  it  was
lawful  to  use  (though  not  to  store  or  sell)  the  spontaneous  pro-
duce of  the  land  throughout  the  extent  originally  possessed  by
Israel,  but  that  even  the  use  of  these  products  was  prohibited
in  such  districts  as  having  originally  belonged  to,  were  again
occupied  by  Israel  after  their  return  from  Babylon.  But  this,
as  other  rules  laid  down  by  the  Rabbis,  had  many  exceptions.^
As  Divinely  enjoined,  the  soil  was  to  be  left  uncultivated
at  the  end  of  every  period  of  six  years,  beginning,  as  the
Jews  argue,  after  the  Passover  for  the  barley,  after  Pente-
cost for  the  wheat,  and  after  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  for
all  fruit-trees.  The  Sabbatical  year  itself  commenced,  as
most  of  them  hold,  on  New  Year's  Day,  which  fell  on  the
new  moon  of  the  tenth  month,  or  Tishri.^  Whatever  grew  of
itself  during  the  year  was  to  belong  to  the  poor,^  which,  how-
ever, as. Lev.  xxv.  6  shows,  did  not  exclude  its  use  as  "  meat,"
only  its  storage  and  sale,  by  the  family  to  which  the  land
belonged.  Yet  a  third  Scriptural  notice  constitutes  the  Sab-
batical year  that  of  "  the  Lord's  release,"  when  no  debt  might  be
claimed  from  an  Israelite  ;*  while  a  fourth  enjoins,  that. ''  in  the
solemnity  of  the  year  of  release,  in  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,"
the  law  was  to  be  read  *'  before  all  Israel  in  their  hearing."  *
It  has  been  strangely  overlooked  that  these  four  ordinances,

•  Mish.  Shev.  vi.  i.

•  The  year  of  Jubilee  began  on  the  loth  of  Tishri,  being  the  Day  of  Atonement.

•  Ex.  xxiii.  10,  II.  *  Deut.  xv.  1-6.  *  Deut.  xxxi.  lo,  ii.


Sabbath  in  the  Temple.  i6i

instead  of  beipg  separate  and  distinct,  are  in  reality  closely
connected.  As  the  assignment  of  what  grew  of  itself  did
not  exclude  the  usufruct  by  the  owners,  so  it  also  followed
of  necessity  that,  in  a  year  when  all  agricultural  labour  ceased,
debts  should  not  be  claimed  from  an  agricultural  population.
Similarly,  it  was  quite  in  accordance  with  the  idea  of  the
Sabbath  and  the  Sabbatical  year  that  the  law  should  be
publicly  read,  to  indicate  that  '*  the  rest "  was  not  to  be  one
of  idleness,  but  of  meditation  on  the  Word  of  God.  ^  It
will  be  gathered  that  in  this  view  the  Divine  law  had  not
intended  the  absolute  remission  of  debts,  but  only  their
*'  release "  during  the  Sabbatical  year.^  Jewish  tradition,
indeed,  holds  the  opposite  ;  but,  by  its  ordinances,  it  ren-
dered the  law  itself  void.  For,  as  explained  by  the  Rabbis,
the  release  from  debt  did  not  include  debts  for  things  pur-
chased in  a  shop,  nor  judicial  fines,  nor  yet  money  lent  on
a  pledge.  But,  as  the  great  Rabbi  Hillel  found  that  even
these  exceptions  were  not  sufficient  to  insure  the  loan  of
money  in  view  of  the  Sabbatical  year,  he  devised  a  formula
called  "  Prosbul "  (probably  *^  addition,"  from  a  Greek  word  to
the  same  effect),  by  which  the  rights  of  a  creditor  were
fully  secured.  The  "Prosbul"  ran  thus:  "I,  A.  B.,  hand  to
you,  the  judges  of  C.  D.  (a  declaration),  to  the  effect  that  I
may  claim  any  debt  due  to  me  at  whatever  time  I  please."
This  ''  Prosbul,"    signed    by   the  judges    or  by  witnesses,

*  Idleness  is  quite  as  much  contrary  to  the  Sabbath  law  as  labour  :  "not  doing
thine  own  ways,  nor  finding  thine  own  pleasure,  nor  speaking  thine  own  words  "
(Isa.  Iviii.  13).

*  The  manumission  of  Jewish  slaves  took  place  in  the  seventh  year  of  their
bondage,  whenever  that  might  be,  and  bears  no  reference  to  the  Sabbatical  year,
with  which,  indeed,  some  of  its  pro^^sions  could  not  easily  have  been  compatible
(DeuL  XV.  14).

M


1 62       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

enabled  a  creditor  to  claim  money  lent  even  in  the  Sabbatical
year ;  and  though  professedly  applying  only  to  debts  on  real
property,  was  so  worded  as  to  cover  every  case.  ^  But  even
this  was  not  all,  and  the  following  legal  fiction  was  suggested
as  highly  meritorious  to  all  concerned.  The  debtor  was  to
offer  payment,  and  the  creditor  to  reply,  "  I  remit ;  "  upon
which  the  debtor  was  to  insist  that  "  nevertheless  ''  the  creditor
was  to  accept  the  repayment.  In  general,  money  owing  to
Jewish  proselytes  was  to  be  repaid  to  them,  but  not  to  their
heirs,  even  though  they  also  had  turned  Jews,  as  by  becoming
a  proselyte  a  man  had  separated  himself  from  his  kin,  who
therefore  were  no  longer,  strictly  speaking,  his  natural  heirs.
Still,  to  make  payment  in  such  a  case  was  deemed  specially
meritorious.  The  Rabbinical  evasions  of  the  law,  which  for-
bade the  use  of  that  which  had  grown  spontaneously  on  the
soil,  are  not  so  numerous  nor  so  irrational.  It  was  ruled
that  part  of  such  products  might  be  laid  by  in  the  house,
provided  sufficient  of  the  same  kind  were  left  in  the  field
for  cattle  and  beasts  to  feed  upon.  Again,  as  m.uch  land
might  be  tilled  as  was  necessary  to  make  payment  of  tribute
or  taxes.  The  omer  (or  '*  wave-sheaf")  at  the  Passover,  and
the  two  wave-loaves  at  Pentecost,  were  also  to  be  made  from
the  barley  and  wheat  grown  that  year  in  the  field.  Lastly,
Rabbinical  ordinance  fixed  the  following  portions  as  being
*'  the  law  "  which  was  to  be  publicly  read  in  the  Temple  by
the  king  or  the  high-priest  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  in  the
Sabbatical  year,  viz.,  Deut.  i.  1-6;  vi.  4-8;  xi.  13-22;  xiv.
22;   XV.  23;  xvii.  14;   xxvi.   12-19  \  xxvii.,  xxviii.  ^      This

1  Mish.  Shev,^  sec.  x.

*  Mish.  Sotah,  vii.  8,  where  a  eurious  story  is  also  told,  to  show  how  deeply  King
Agrippa  was  affected  when  performing  this  service.


Sabbath  in  the  Temple.  163

service  concluded  with  a  benediction,  which  resembled  that  of
the  high-priest  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  except  that  it
referred  not  to  the  remission  of  sins.^

The  account  just  given  proves  that  there  was  scarcely  any
Divme  ordinance,  which  the  Rabbis,  by  their  traditions,
rendered  more  fully  void,  and  converted  into  *'  a  yoke  which
neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to  bear,"  than  the  Sab-
bath law.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Gospels  bring  before  us  Christ
more  frequently  on  the  Sabbath  than  on  any  other  festive  occa-
sion. It  seemed  to  be  His  special  day  for  working  the  work  of
His  Father.  On  the  Sabbath  He  preached  in  the  synagogues  ;
He  taught  in  the  Temple  ;  He  healed  the  sick  ;  He  came  to  the
joyous  meal  with  which  the  Jews  were  wont  to  close  the  day.^
Yet  their  opposition  broke  out  most  fiercely  in  proportion  as
He  exhibited  the  true  meaning  and  object  of  the  Sabbath.
Never  did  the  antagonism  between  the  spirit  and  the  letter
more  clearly  appear.  And  if  in  their  worship  of  the  letter
they  crushed  out  the  spirit  of  the  Sabbath  law,  we  can
scarcely  wonder  that  they  so  overlaid  with  their  ordinances
the  appointment  of  the  Sabbatical  year  as  well-nigh  to  extin-
guish its  meaning.^  That  evidently  was,  that  the  earth,  and
all  that  is  upon  it,  belongeth  to  the  Lord ;  that  the  eyes  of
all  wait  upon  Him,  that  He  may  "  give  them  their  meat  in
due  season  ;"*  that  the  land  of  Israel  was  His  special  posses-
sion ;  that  man  liveth  not  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word
which  proceedeth  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord     and  that  He

^  Relandus,  suggests  that  the  expression  (Matt.  xxiv.  20),  **  pray  that  your  flight
be  not  on  the  Sabbath,"  may  apply  to  the  Sabbatical  year,  as  one  in  which  the
fugitives  would  find  it  difficult  to  secure  needful  support.

"^  Luke  xiv.  I.

*  Compare  also  the  remarks  by  Oehler  in  Herzog's  Encycl,^  xii.  p.  211/

*  Psa.  civ.  27  ;  cxlv.  16.


164        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

giveth  us  our  daily  bread,  so  that  it  is  vain  to  rise  up  early,
to  sit  up  late,  to  eat  the  bread  of  sorrows.  ^  Beyond  it  all,  it
pointed  to  the  fact  of  sin  and  redemption :  the  whole
creation  which  "groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together
until  now,"  waiting  for  and  expecting  that  blessed  Sabbath,
when  ''creation  itself  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage
of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of
God."  ^  Thus,  as  the  Sabbath  itself,  so  the  Sabbatical  year
pointed  forward  to  the  "  rest  which  remaineth  to  the  people
of  God,"  when,  contest  and  labour  completed,  they  sing,  **  on
the  other  side  of  the  flood,"  the  song  of  Moses  and  of  the
Lamb :  ^  "  Great  and  marvellous  are  Thy  works,  Lord  God
Almighty ;  just  and  true  are  Thy  ways.  Thou  King  of  saints.
Who  shall  not  fear  Thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  Thy  name  ?
for  Thou  only  art  holy:  for  all  nations  shall  come  and
worship  before  Thee ;  for  Thy  judgments  are  made  manifest."*

*  Psa.  cxxvii.  2.  '  Rom.  viii.  21,  22.  '  Rev.  xv   3,  4.

*  For  an  account  of  the  Sabbaticad  years,  mentioned  by  tradition,  see  Wieseler,
Chron.  Synopse^  p.  204.


CHAPTER  X.

FESTIVE  CYCLES  AND  ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  CALENDAR.

•*  Then  sought  they  for  Jesus,  and  spake  among  themselves,  as  they  stood  in  the
temple,  What  think  ye,  that  he  will  not  come  to  the  feast  ?  " — ^JOHN  xi.  56.

THE  symbolical  character  which  is  to  be  traced  in  all
the  institutions  of  the  Old  Testament,  appears  also  in
the  arrangement  of  its  festive  calendar.  Whatever  classi-
fication of  the  festivals  may  be  proposed,  one  general
characteristic  pervades  the  whole.  Unquestionably,  the
number  seven  marks  in  Scripture  the  sacred  measurement
of  time.  The  Sabbath  is  the  seventh  of  days ;  seven  weeks
aftei  the  commencement  of  the  ecclesiastical  year  is  the  Feast
ef  Pentecost ;  the  seventh  month  is  more  sacred  than  the  rest,
its  "  firstborn  "  or  "  New  Moon ''  being  not  only  devoted  to
the  Lord  like  those  of  the  other  months,  but  specially  cele-
brated as  the  "  Feast  of  Trumpets,"  while  three  other  festivals
occur  within  its  course — the  Day  of  Atonement,  the  Feast
of  Tabernacles,  and  its  Octave.^  Similarly,  each  seventh  year
is  Sabbatical,  and  after  seven  times  seven  years  comes  that
of  Jubilee.  Nor  is  this  all.  Seven  days  in  the  year  may
be  designated  as  the  most  festive,  since  in  them  alone  *^  no

*  Further  particulars  are  given  in  the  chapter  on  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.


1 66       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

servile  work "  was  to  be  done/  while  on  the  so-called  minor
festivals  {Moed  Kato?i),  that  is,  on  the  days  following  the  first
of  the  Passover  week  and  of  that  of  Tabernacles,  the  diminu-
tion of  festive  observances  and  of  restrictions  on  labour  marks
their  less  sacred  character.

Besides  this  general  division  of  time  by  the  sacred  number
seven,  certain  general  ideas  probably  underlay  the  festive
cycles.  Thus  we  may  mark  two,  or  else  three,  such  cycles ;
the  one  commencing  with  the  Paschal  sacrifice  and  ending
on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  Israel's
calling  and  wilderness  life ;  the  other,  which  occurs  in  the
seventh  month  (of  rest),  marking  Israel's  possession  of  the
land  and  grateful  homage  to  Jehovah.  From  these  two
cycles  the  Day  of  Atonement  may  have  to  be  distinguished,
as  intermediate  between,  applying  to  both,  and  yet  possessing
a  character  of  its  own,  as  Scripture  calls  it,  "a  Sabbath  of
Sabbatism,"^  in  which  not  only  ''servile  work,"  but  as  on
the  v/eekly  Sabbath,  labour  of  any  kind  was  prohibited.
In  Hebrew  two  terms  are  employed  —  the  one,  Moed,  or
appointed  meeting,  applied  to  all  festive  seasons,  including
Sabbaths  and  New  Moons ;  the  other,  Chag,  from  a  root
which  means  "  to  dance,"  or  **  to  be  joyous,"  applying  exclu-
sively to  the  three  festivals  of  Easter,  Pentecost,  and  Taber-
nacles, in  which  all  males  were  to  appear  before  the  Lord  in
His  sanctuary.  If  we  might  venture  to  render' the  general
term  Moadim  by  "  trystings  "  of  Jehovah  with  His  people,
the  other  would  be  intended  to  express  the  joyousness  which

^  These  are:  the  first  and  the  seventh  days  of  the  ** Feast  of  Unleavened
Bread,"  Pentecost,  New  Year's  Day,  the  Day  of  Atonement,  the  first  day  of  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and  its  Octave.

2  The  term  is  rendered  in  the  Authorised  Version,  *'  Sabbath  of  rest,"  Lev.  xvi.
31  ;  xxiii.  32.


Festive  Cycles  and  Arrangement  of  Calendar.     167

was  to  be  a  leading  characteristic  of  the  "pilgrim-feasts.'*
Indeed,  the  Rabbis  expressly  mention  these  three  as  marking
the  great  festivals :  Reiyahy  Chagigahy  and  Simchah ;  that  is,
presence,  or  appearance  at  Jerusalem  ;  the  appointed  festive
offerings  of  the  worshippers,  which  are  not  to  be  confounded
with  the  public  sacrifices  offered  on  these  occasions  in  the
name  of  the  whole  congregation  ;  and  joyousness,  with  which
they  connect  the  freewill  offerings  that  each  brought,  as  the
Lord  had  blessed  him,  and  which  afterwards  were  shared
with  the  poor,  the  desolate,  and  the  Levite,  in  the  joyous
meal  that  followed  the  public  services  of  the  Temple.  To
these  general  characteristics  of  the  three  great  feasts  we
ought,  perhaps,  to  add  in  regard  to  all  festive  seasons,  that
each  was  to  be  a  "  holy  convocation,"  or  gathering  for  sacred
purposes  ;  the  injunction  of  "  rest  "  from  ''  servile,"  or  else
from  all  work  ;  and,  lastly,  certain  special  sacrifices  which
were  to  be  brought  in  the  name  of  the  whole  congregation.
Besides  the  Mosaic  festivals,  the  Jews  celebrated  at  the  time
of  Christ  two  other  feasts — that  of  Esther,  or  Purinij  and  that
of  the  Dedication  of  the  Temple^  on  its  restoration  by  Judas
the  Maccabee.  Certain  minor  observances,  and  the  public
fasts  in  memory  of  the  great  national  calamities,  will  be  noticed
in  the  sequeL  Private  fasts  would,  of  course,  depend  on  indi-
viduals, but  the  strict  Pharisees  were  wont  to  fast  every  Mon-
day and  Thursday^  during  the  weeks  intervening  between  the
Passover  and  Pentecost,  and  again,  between  the  Feast  of
Tabernacles  and  that  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Temple.  It  is
to  this  practice  that  the  Pharisee  in  the  parable  refers^  when
boasting  :  "  I  fast  twice  in  the  week."

»  Because  on  a  Thursday  Moses  had  gone  up  to  Mount  Sinai,  and  came  down  on  a
Monday,  when  he  received  for  the  sec  and  tune  the  Tables  of  the  Law.   "^  Luke  xviii.  I2.


1 68        The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

The  duty  of  appearing  three  times  a  year  in  the  Temple
applied  to  all  male  Israelites — bondsmen,  the  deaf,  dumb,  and
lame,  those  whom  sickness,  infirmity,  or  age  rendered  incapable
of  going  on  foot  up  the  mountain  of  the  house,  and,  of  course,  all
in  a  state  of  Levitical  uncleanness,  being  excepted.  In  general,
the  duty  of  appearing  before  the  Lord  at  the  services  of  His
house  was  deemed  paramount.  Here  an  important  Rabbinical
principle  came  in,  which,  although  not  expressed  in  Scripture,
seems  clearly  founded  upon  it,  that  "  a  sacrifice  could  not  be
offered  for  any  one  unless  he  himself  were  present,"  to  pre-
sent and  to  lay  his  hand  upon  it.^  It  followed  that,  as  the
morning  and  evening  sacrifices,  and  those  on  feast-days  were
purchased  with  money  contributed  by  all,  and  offered  on  behalf
of  the  whole  congregation,  all  Israel  should  have  attended
these  services.  This  was  manifestly  impossible,  but  to  repre-
sent the  people  twenty-four  courses  of  lay  attendants  were
appointed,  corresponding  to  those  of  the  priests  and  the  Levites.
These  were  the  "  stationary  men,"  or  "  men  of  the  station,"  or
**  standing  men,"  from  "  their  standing  there  in  the  Temple  as
Israel's  representatives."  For  clearness  sake,  we  repeat  that  each
of  these  *'  courses  "  had  its  *'  head,"  and  served  for  one  week  ;
those  of  the  station  on  service,  who  did  not  appear  in  Jerusalem,
meeting  in  a  central  synagogue  of  their  district,  and  spending
the  time  in  fasting  and  prayer  for  their  brethren.  On  the  day
before  the  Sabbath,  on  the  Sabbath  itself,  and  on  the  day  fol-
lowing, they  did  not  fast,  on  account  of  the  joy  of  the  Sabbath.
Each  day  they  read  a  portion  of  Scripture,  the  first  and  second
chapters  of  Genesis  being  for  this  purpose  arranged  into  sec-
tions  for  the  week.  This  practice,  which  tradition  traced  up
to  Samuel  and  David,^  was  of  ancient  date.     But  the  "  men

^  Lev.  i.  3 ;  iii.  2,  8.  •  Taan,  iv.  2.


Festive  Cycles  and  Arrangement  of  Cale7tdar.     169

of  the  station"  did  not  impose  hands  on  either  the  morning  or
evening  sacrifice,  nor  on  any  other  pubUc  offering.^  Their
duty  was  twofold  :  to  represent  all  Israel  in  the  services  of
the  sanctuary,  and  to  act  as  a  sort  of  guide  to  those  who  had
business  in  the  Temple.  Thus,  at  a  certain  part  of  the  ser-
vice, the  head  of  the  course  brought  up  those  who  had  come  to
make  an  atonement  on  being  cleansed  from  any  impurity,  and
ranged  them  along  the  "  Gate  of  Nicanor,"  in  readiness  for
the  ministry  of  the  officiating  priests.  The  "  men  of  the  sta-
tion "  were  dispensed  from  attendance  in  the  Temple  on  all
occasions  when  the  **  Hallel "  was  chanted,^  possibly  because
the  responses  of  the  people  when  the  hymn  was  sung  showed
that  they  needed  no  formal  representatives.

Hitherto  we  have  not  adverted  to  the  difficulties  which
those  who  intended  to  appear  in  Jerusalem  at  the  feasts
would  experience  from  the  want  of  any  fixed  calendar.
As  the  year  of  the  Hebrews  was  lunar ^  not  solar,  it  con-
sisted of  only  354  days  8  hours  48'  38''.  This,  distributed
among  twelve  months,  would  in  the  course  of  years  have
completely  disordered  the  months,  so  that  the  first  month,
or  Nisan  (corresponding  to  the  end  of  March  or  the  begin-
ning of  April),  in  the  middle  of  which  the  first  ripe  barley
was  to  be  presented  to  the  Lord,  might  have  fallen  in  the
middle  of  winter.  Accordingly,  the  Sanhedrim  appointed
a  Committee  of  three,  of  which  the  chief  of  the  Sanhedrim
was  always  president,  and  which,  if  not  unanimous,  might
be   increased   to    seven,    when    a    majority  of  voices   would

^  The  ox^y public  offerings,  with  ''imposition  of  hands,"  were  the  scapegoat  on
the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  the  bullock  when  the  congregation  had  sinned  through
ignorance.

2  This  happened  therefore  on  eighteen  days  of  the  year.  These  will  be  specified
in  a  subsequent  chapter.


170       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

suffice,  to  determine  which  year  was  to  be  made  a  leap-
year  by  the  insertion  of  a  thirteenth  month.  Their  resolu-
tion^ was  generally  taken  in  the  twelfth  month  (Adar),  the
additional,  or  thirteenth  month  (Ve-Adar),  being  inserted
between  the  twelfth  and  the  first.  A  Sabbatical  year  could
not  be  a  leap-year,  but  that  preceding  it  was  always  such.
Sometimes  two,  but  never  three  leap-years  succeeded  each
other.  Commonly,  every  third  year  required  the  addition
of  a  month.  The  mean  duration  of  the  Jewish  month  being
29  days  12  hours  44'  3^',  it  required,  during  a  period  of
nineteen  years,  the  insertion  of  seven  months  to  bring  the
lunar  era  in  accordance  with  the  Julian.

And  this  brings  up  yet  another  difficulty.  The  Jews
calculated  the  month  according  to  the  phases  of  the  moon,
each  month  consisting  of  either  twenty-nine  or  thirty  days,
and  beginning  with  the  appearance  of  the  new  moon.  But
this  opened  a  fresh  field  of  uncertainty.  It  is  quite  true  that
every  one  might  observe  for  himself  the  appearance  of  a
new  moon.  But  this  would  again  partly  depend  on  the  state
of  the  weather.  Besides,  it  left  an  authoritative  declaration
of  the  commencement  of  a  month  unsupplied.  And  yet  not
only  was  the  first  of  every  month  to  be  observed  as  "  New
Moon's,  Day,"  but  the  feasts  took  place  on  the  loth,  iSth,
or  other  day  of  the  month,  which  could  not  be  accurately
determined  without  a  certain  knowledge  of  its  beginning.
To  supply  this  want  the  Sanhedrim  sat  in  the  ''  Hall  of
Polished  Stones  "  to  receive  the  testimony  of  credible  wit-

^  Tradition  has  it,  that  neither  high-priest  nor  king  ever  took  part  in  these
deUberations,  the  former  because  he  might  object  to  a  leap-year  as  throwing  the
Day  of  Atonement  later  into  the  cold  season  ;  the  king,  because  he  might  wish  for
thirteen  months,  in  order  to  get  thirteen  months'  revenue  in  one  year  !


Festive  Cycles  and  Arrangement  of  Calendar.^     171

nesses  that  they  had  seen  the  new  moon.  To  encourage  as
many  as  possible  to  come  forward  on  so  important  a  testi-
mony, these  witnesses  were  handsomely  entertained  at  the
public  expense.  If  the  new  moon  had  appeared  at  the
commencement  of  the  30th  day — which  would  correspond
to  our  evening  of  the  29th,  as  the  Jews  reckoned  the  day
from  evening  to  evening — the  Sanhedrim  declared  the  pre-
vious month  to  have  been  one  of  twenty-nine  days,  or  "  im-
perfect." ^  Immediately  thereon  men  were  sent  to  a  signal-
station  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  where  beacon-fires  were  lit
and  torches  waved,  till  a  kindling  flame  on  a  hill  in  the
distance  indicated  that  the  signal  had  been  perceived.  Thus
the  tidings,  that  this  was  the  new  moon,  would  be  carried
from  hill  to  hill,  far  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Palestine,
to  those  of  the  dispersion,  ''beyond  the  river.''  Again,  if
credible  witnesses  had  not  appeared  to  testify  to  the  appear-
ance of  the  new  moon  on  the  evening  of  the  29th,
the  next  evening,  or  that  of  the  30th,  according  to  our
reckoning,  was  taken  as  the  commencement  of  the  new
month,  in  which  case  the  previous  month  was  declared  to
have  been  one  of  thirty  days,  or  '* fully  It  was  ruled  that
a  year  should  neither  have  less  than  four  nor  more  than  eight
such  full  months  of  thirty  days.

But  these  early  fire-signals  opened  the  way  for  serious  incon-
venience. The  enemies  of  the  Jews  lit  beacons  to  deceive
those  at  a  distance,  and  it  became  necessary  to  send  special
messengers  to  announce  the  new  moon.  These  were,  how-
ever, dispatched  only  seven  times  in  the  year,  just  in  time
for  the  various  feasts — in  NisaUy  for  the   Passover   on   the

1  The  formula  used  by  the  Sanhedrim  upon  declaring  the  new  moon  was, "  It  is
sacred  ! "


172       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

15th,  and  in  the  month  following,  lyar,  for  the  **  Second
Passover,"  kept  by  those  who  had  been  debarred  from  the
first  ;^  m  Ab  (the  fifth  month),  for  the  fast  on  the  9th,  on
account  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem ;  in  Elul  (the  sixth
month),  on  account  of  the  approaching  solemnities  of  Tishri  ;
in  Tishri  (the  seventh  month),  for  its  festivals  ;  in  K  is  lev  (the
ninth  month),  for  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Temple  ;
and  in  Adar,  for  Purim,  Thus,  practically,  all  difficulties
were  removed,  except  in  reference  to  the  month  Elul,  since,
as  the  new  moon  of  the  following  month,  or  Tishri,  was  the
*'  Feast  of  Trumpets,"  it  would  be  exceedingly  important  to
know  in  time  whether  Elul  had  twenty-nine  or  thirty  days.
But  here  the  Rabbis  ruled  that  Elul  should  be  regarded  as  a
month  of  twenty-nine  days,  unless  a  message  to  the  contrary
were  received — that,  indeed,  since  the  days  of  Ezra  it  had
always  been  so,  and  that  accordingly  New  Year's  Day  would
be  the  day  after  the  29th  of  Elul  To  make,  however,
assurance  doubly  sure,  it  soon  became  the  practice  to  keep
New  Year's  Day  on  two  successive  days,  and  this  has  since
been  extended  into  a  duplication  of  all  the  great  feast  days
(of  course,  with  the  exception  of  fasts),  and  that,  although
the  calendar  has  long  been  fixed,  and  error  is  therefore  no
more  possible.

The  present  Hebrew  names  of  the  months  are  variously
supposed  to  be  derived  from  the  Chaldee,  or  from  the  Persian
language.  They  certainly  do  not  appear  before  the  return
from  Babylon.  Before  that,  the  months  were  named  only
after  their  numbers,  or  else  from  the  natural  phenomena
characteristic  of  the  seasons,  as  Abib,  **  sprouting,"  "green
ears,"  for  the  first ;  ^  Ziv,  "  splendour,"   "  flowering,"  for  the

1  Numb.  ix.  9-1 1.  ^  gx.  xiii.  4;  xxiii.  15  ;  Deut.  xvi.  I.


Festive  Cycles  and  Arrangement  of  Calendar.      1 73

second ;  ^  Btdy  "  rain,"  for  the  eighth  ;  ®  and  Ethanim^  "  flow-
ing rivers,"  for  the  seventh.^  The  division  of  the  year  into
ecclesiastical^  which  commenced  with  the  month  Nisan  (the
end  of  March  or  beginning  of  April),  or  about  the  spring
equinox,  and  civile  which  commenced  with  the  seventh
month,  or  Tishri^  corresponding  to  the  autumn  equinox,  has
by  many  likewise  been  supposed  to  have  only  originated  after
the  return  from  Babylon.  But  the  analogy  of  the  twofold
arrangement  of  weights,  measures,  and  money  into  civil  and
sacred,  and  other  notices  seem  against  this  view,  and  it  is  more
likely  that  from  the  first  the  Jews  distinguished  the  civil  year,
which  began  inTishri,  from  the  ecclesiastical,  which  commenced
in  NisaUy  from  which  month,  as  the  first,  all  the  others  were
counted.  To  this  twofold  division  the  Rabbis  add,  that  for
tithing  the  herds  and  flocks  the  year  was  reckoned  from  Elul
to  Ehdy  and  for  taxing  fruits  often  from  Shebat  to  Shebat

The  earliest  era  adopted  by  the  Jews  was  that  which  was
reckoned  to  commence  with  the  deliverance  from  Egypt.
During  the  reigns  of  the  Jewish  kings,  time  was  computed
from  the  year  of  their  accession  to  the  throne.  After  their
return  from  exile,  the  Jews  dated  their  years  according  to  the
Seleucidic  era,  which  began  312  B.C.,  or  3,450  from  the  creation
of  the  world.  For  a  short  time  after  the  war  of  independence,
it  became  customary  to  reckon  dates  from  the  year  of  the
liberation  of  Palestine.  However,  for  a  very  long  period  after
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (probably,  till  the  twelfth
century  A.D.),  the  Seleucidic  era  remained  in  common  use,
when  it  finally  gave  place  to  the  present  mode  of  reckoning
among  the  Jews,  which  dates  from  the  creation  of  the  world.
To  commute  the  Jewish  year  into  that  of  our  common  era,

1  I  Kings  vi.  I.  ^  I  Kings  vi.  38.  ^  I  Kings  viii.  2.


174       ^^  Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

we  have  to  add  to  the  latter  3,761,  always  bearing  in  mind,
however,  that  the  common  or  civil  Jewish  year  commences  in
the  month  of  Tishri,  i.e,^  in  autumn.

The  week  was  divided  into  seven  days,  of  which,  however,
only  the  seventh — the  Sabbath — had  a  name  assigned  to  it,
the  rest  being  merely  noted  by  numerals.  The  day  was
computed  from  sunset  to  sunset,  or  rather  to  the  appearance
of  the  first  three  stars  with  which  a  new  day  commenced.
Before  the  Babylonish  captivity,  it  was  divided  into  morning,
mid-day,  evening,  and  ni^^^ht ;  but  during  the  residence  in
Babylon,  the  Hebrews  adopted  the  division  of  the  day  into
twelve  hours,  whose  duration  varied  with  the  length  of  the
day.  The  longest  day  consisted  of  fourteen  hours  and  twelve
minutes ;  the  shortest,  of  nine  hours  forty-eight  minutes ;
the  difference  between  the  two  being  thus  more  than  four
hours.  On  an  average,  the  first  hour  of  the  day  corresponded
nearly  to  our  6  a.m.  ;  the  third  hour  (when,  according  to
Matthew  xx.  3,  the  market-place  was  full),  to  our  9  a.m. ;  the
close  of  the  sixth  hour,  to  our  mid-day  ;  while  at  the  eleventh,
the  day  neared  its  close.  The  Romans  reckoned  the  hours
from  midnight,  a  fact  which  explains  the  apparent  discrepancy
between  John  xix.  14,  where,  at  the  sixth  hour  (of  Roman
calculation),  Pilate  brings  Jesus  out  to  the  Jews,  while  at  the
third  hour  of  the  Jewish,  and  hence  the  ninth  of  the  Roman  and
of  our  calculation,^  He  was  led  forth  to  be  crucified.  The  night
was  divided  by  the  Romans  into  four,  by  the  Jews  into  three
watches.  The  Jews  subdivided  the  hour  into  1,080  parts
(chlakim),  and  again  each  part  into  seventy-six  moments.

For  the  convenience  of  the  reader,  we  subjoin  a  calendar,
showing  the  occurrence  of  the  various  festive  days : —

^  Mark  xv.  25.


Festive  Cycles  and  Arrange7nent  of  Calendar.     175

I.— NISAN.
Spring  Equinox,  end  of  March  or  beginning  of  ApriL

DAYS.

I.  New  Moon.

14.  The  preparation  for  the  Passover  and  the  Paschal  Sacrifice^

15.  First  Day  of  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,

16.  Waiving  of  the  first  ripe  Omer.
21.  Close  of  the  Passover.

II.— lYAR.

I.     New  Moon.
15.      *'  Second,"  or  "little"  Passover.

18.     Lag-le-Omer,  or  the  33rd  day  in  Omer,  /.^.,  from  the  presentation  of  the  first
ripe  sheaf  offered  on  the  2nd  day  of  the  Passover,  or  the  15th  of  Nisan.

III.— SiVAN

I.     New  Moon.

6.  Feast  of  Pentecost,  or  of  Weeks — 7  weeks,  or  50  days  after  the  beginning  of
the  Passover,  when  the  two  loaves  of  first  ripe  wheat  were  **  waived,"
commemorative  also  of  the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Mount  Sinai.

IV. — ^Thamus.
I.     New  Moon.

17.  Fast;  taking  of  Jerusalem  on  the  9th  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (and  on  the  17th

by  Titus).     If  the  17th  occur  on  a  Sabbath,  the  Fast  is  kept  on  the  day
following.

v.— Ab.
I.     New  Moon.
9.     Fast — (threefold)  destruction  of  the  Temple,

VI.— Eluu
I.     New  Moon.

VII.— TiSHRI.

%

Beginning  of  Civil  YeA

1&2  New  Year's  Feast.

3.  Fast  for  the  murder  of  Gedaliah.

10.  Day  of  Atonement ;  Great  Fast.

15.  Feast  of  Tabernacles.

21.  Close  of  the  above.

22.  Octave  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.    (In  the  Synagogues,  on  the  23rd,  Feast

on  the  annual  completion  of  the  Reading  of  the  Law.)


<


176       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  ami  Services.
VIIL — ^Marcheshvan  or  Cheshvan.

DAYS.

I.    New  Moon.

IX.— KiSLEV.
I.     New  Moon.
25.     Feast  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Temple,  or  of  Candles,  lasting  eight  days,  in
remembrance  of  the  Restoration  of  the  Temple  after  the  victory  gained
by  Judas  Maccabeus  (B.C.  148)  over  the  Syrians.

X.— Tebeth.
•   I.     New  Moon.
10,     Fast  on  account  of  the  Siege  of  Jerusalem.

XI. — Shebat.
I.     New  Moon.

XII.t-Adar.1
I.     New  Moon.

13.  Fast  of  Esther.     If  it  fall  on  a  Sabbath,  kept  on  the  Thursday  preceding,

14.  Purim,  or  Feast  of  Haman.

15.  Purim  Proper.

*  The  M^gillath  Taanith  ("roll  of  fasts"),  probably  the  oldest  Aram ean  post-
biblical  record  preserved  (though  containing  later  admixtures),  enumerates  thirty-
five  days  in  the  year  when  fasting,  and  mostly  also  public  mourning,  are  not
allowed.  One  of  these  is  the  day  of  Herod's  death  !  This  interesting  historical
relic  has  been  critically  examined  of  late  by  such  writers  as  Derenbourg  and  Gratz.
After  their  exile  the  ten  tribes,  or  at  least  their  descendants,  seem  to  have  dated
from  that  event  (696  B.C.).  This  appears  from  inscriptions  on  tombstones  of  the
Crimean  Jews,  who  have  been  shown  to  have  descended  from  the  ten  tribes,
(Comp.  Davidson  in  Kitto's  CycL  iii.  1 1 73.)


CHAPTER  XI.

THE     PASSOVER.

•*  Purge  out  therefore  the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be .  a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  un-
leavened.    For  even  Christ  our  Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us/' — I  CoR.  v.  7.

THE  cycle  of  Temple-festivals  appropriately  opens  with
"  the  Passover  "  and  "  Feast  of  unleavened  bread."  For,
properly  speaking,  these  two  are  quite  distinct,^  the  *'  Pass-
over" taking  place  on  the  14th  of  Nisan,  and  the  "  Feast  of
unleavened  bread"  commencing  on  the  iSth,  and  lasting  for
seven  days,  to  the  21st  of  the  month.  ^  But  from  their  close
connection  they  are  generally  treated  as  one,  both  in  the  Old
and  in  the  New  Testament  f  and  Josephus,  on  one  occasion,
even  describes  it  as  "a  feast  for  eight  days."^

There  are  peculiarities  about  the  Passover  which  mark  it  as
the  most  important,  and,  indeed,  take  it  out  of  the  rank  of
the  other  festivals.  It  was  the  first  of  the  three  feasts  on
which  all  males  in  Israel  were  bound  to  appear  before  the
Lord  in  the  place  which  He  would  choose  (the  two  others
being  the  Feast  of  Weeks  and  that  of  Tabernacles^).     All  the

1  Lev.  xxiii.  5,  6 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  16,  17  ;  2  Chron.  xxx.  15,  21 ;  Ezra  vi.  19,  22  ;
Mark  xiv.  I.

2  Ex.  xii.  15.  3  Matt.  xxvi.  17;  Mark  xiv.  12;  Luke  xxii.  I.

*  Antiq.  ii.  15,  I ;  but  comp.  iii.  10,  5  ;  ix.  13,  3.

•  Ex.  xxiii.  14;  xxxiv.  18-23  ;  Lev.  xxiii.  4-22;  Deut.  xvi.  16.

N  .


178        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

three  great  festivals  bore  a  threefold  reference.  They  pointed,
first,  to  the  season  of  the  year,  or  rather  to  the  enjoyment  of  the
fruits  of  the  good  land  which  the  Lord  had  given  to  His  people
in  possession,  but  of  which  He  claimed  for  Himself  the  real
ownership.^  This  reference  to  nature  is  expressly  stated  in
regard  to  the  Feast  of  Weeks  and  that  of  Tabernacles,'^  but,
though  not  less  distinct,  it  is  omitted  in  connection  with  the
feast  of  unleavened  bread.  On  the  other  hand,  great  promi-
nence is  given  to  the  historical  bearing  of  the  Passover,  while
it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  other  two  festivals,  although  it  could
not  have  been  wholly  wanting".  But  the  feast  of  unleavened
bread  celebrated  the  one  grand  event  which  underlay  the  whole
history  of  Israel,  and  marked  alike  their  miraculous  deliverance
from  destruction  and  from  bondage,  and  the  commencement  of
their  existence  as  a  nation.  For  in  the  night  of  the  Passover
the  children  of  Israel,  miraculously  preserved  and  set  free,  for
the  first  time  became  a  people,  and  that  by  the  direct  interpo-
sition of  God.  The  third  bearing  of  all  the  festivals,  but  espe-
cially of  the  Passover,  is  typical.  Every  reader  of  the  New
Testament  knows  how  frequent  are  such  allusions  to  the  Exodus,
the  Paschal  Lamb,  the  Paschal  Supper,  and  the  feast  of  unlea-
vened bread.  And  that  this  meaning  was  intended  from  the
first,  not  only  in  reference  to  the  Passover,  but  to  all  the  feasts,
appears  from  the  whole  design  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  from
the  exact  correspondence  between  the  types  and  the  antitypes.
Indeed  it  is,  so  to  speak,  impressed  upon  the  Old  Testament  by
a  law  of  internal  necessity.  For  when  God  bound  up  the  future
of  all  nations  in  the  history  of  Abraham  and  his  seed,^  He
made  that  history  prophetic  ;  and  each  event  and  every  rite

*  Lev.  XXV.  23  ;  Psa.  Ixxxv.  i  ;  Isa.  viii.  8,  xiv.  2 ;  Hos.  ix.  3.
*  Ex.  xxiii.  14-16  ;  xxxiv,  22.  ^  Gen.  xii.  3.


The  Passover.  179

became,  as  it  were,  a  bud,  destined  to  open  in  blossom  and
ripen  into  fruit  on  that  tree  under  the  shadow  of  which  all
nations  were  to  be  gathered.

Thus  nature^  history y  and  grace  combined  to  give  a  special
meaning  to  the  festivals,  but  chiefly  to  the  Passover.  It  was
the  feast  of  spring  ;  the  spring-time  of  nature,  when,  after  the
death  of  winter,  the  scattered  seeds  were  born  into  a  new
harvest,  and  the  first  ripe  sheaf  could  be  presented  to  the
Lord  ;  the  spring-time  of  Israel's  history,  too,  when  each  year
the  people  celebrated  anew  their  national  birthday  ;  and  the
spring-time  of  grace,  their  grand  national  deliverance  pointing
forward  to  the  birth  of  the  true  Israel,  and  the  Passover  sacri-
fice to  that  '*  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the
world."  Accordingly,  the  month  of  the  Passover,  Abib,  or,  as
it  was  called  in  later  times,  Nisan,^  was  to  be  unto  them  **the
beginning  of  months  " — the  birth-month  of  the  sacred,  and  at
the  same  time  the  seventh  in  the  civil,  year.  Here  we  mark  again
the  significance  of  seven  as  the  sacred  or  covenant  number.  On
the  other  hand,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  which  closed  the  fes-
tive cycle,  took  place  on  the  15  th  of  the  seventh  month  of  the
sacred,  which  was  also  the  first  in  the  civil,  year.  Nor  is  it  less
significant  that  both  the  Passover  and  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles
fell  upon  the  15th  day  of  the  month  ;  that  is,  at  full  moon,  or
when  the  month  had,  so  to  speak,  attained  its  full  strength.

The  name  of  the  Passover,  in  Hebrew  Pesach^  and  in
Aramaean  and  Greek  Pascka,  is  derived  from  a  root  which
means  to  "  step  over,'*  or  to  *'  overleap,''  and  thus  points  back
to  the  historical  origin  of  the  festival.^  But  the  circumstances
in  which  the  people  were  placed  necessarily  rendered  its  first

^  Abib  is  the  month  of  **  sprouting"  or  of  **  green  ears.*^*  Esth.  iii.  7;  Neh.
ii.  I.  ^  Ex.  xii.


i8o       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

celebration,  in  some  particulars,  different  from  its  later  observ-
ance, which,  so  far  as  possible,  was  brought  into  harmony  with
the  general  Temple  practice.  Accordingly,  Jewish  authorities
rightly  distinguish  between  "  the  Egyptian  "  and  the  "  Perma-
nent Passover."  On  its  first  institution  it  was  ordained  that
the  head  of  every  house  should,  on  the  loth  of  Nisan,  select
either  a  lamb  or  a  kid  of  the  goats,  of  the  first  year,  and
without  blemish.  Later  Jewish  ordinances,  dating  after  the
return  from  Babylon,  limit  it  to  a  lamb ;  and  it  is  explained
that  the  four  days  previous  to  the  slaying  of  the  lamb  referred
to  the  four  generations  that  had  passed  after  the  children
of  Israel  went  down  into  Egypt.  The  lamb  was  to  be
killed  on  the  eve  of  the  14th,  or  rather,  as  the  phrase  is,
*' between  the  two  evenings."^  According  to  the  Samaritans,
the  Karaite  Jews,  and  many  modern  interpreters,  this  means
between  actual  sunset  and  complete  darkness  (or,  say,  between
six  and  seven  P.M.) ;  but  from  the  contemporary  testimony
of  Josephus,^  and  from  Talmudical  authorities,  there  cannot
be  a  doubt  that,  at-  the  time  of  our  Lord,  it  was  regarded
as  the  interval  between  the  sun's  commencing  to  decline  and
his  actual  disappearance.  This  allows  a  sufficient  period  for
the  numerous  lambs  which  had  to  be  killed,  and  agrees  with
the  traditional  account  that  on  the  eve  of  the  Passover  the
daily  evening  sacrifice  was  offered  an  hour,  or,  if  it  fell  on
a  Friday,  two  hours,  before  the  usual  time.

In  the  original  institution  the  blood  of  this  sacrifice  was
to  be  sprinkled  with  hyssop  on  the  lintel  and  the  two  door-
posts of  the  house,  probably  as  being  the  most  prominent
place  of  entrance.  Then  the  whole  animal,  without  breaking
a  bone  of  it,  was  to  be  roasted,  and  eaten  by  each  family —

1  Ex.  xii.  6 ;  Lev.  xxiii.  5 ;  Numb.  ix.  3,  5.  ^  y^^  JVars,  vi.  9,  3.


The  Passover.  i8i

or,  if  the  number  of  its  members  were  too  small,  by  two
neighbouring  families — along  with  unleavened  bread  and  b:tter
herbs,  to  symboHse  the  bitterness  of  their  bondage  and  the
haste  of  their  deliverance,  and  also  to  point  forward  to  the
manner  in  which  the  true  Israel  were  in  all  time  to  have  fel-
lowship in  the  Paschal  Lamb.^  All  who  were  circumcised  were
to  partake  of  this  meal,  and  that  arrayed  as  for  a  journey  ;  and
whatsoever  was  not  consumed  was  to  be  burnt  on  the  spot.
These  ordinances  in  regard  to  the  Passover  were  afterwards
modified  during  the  journey  in  the  wilderness  to  the  effect,
that  all  males  were  to  appear  "  in  the  place  which  the  Lord
shall  choose,''  and  there  alike  to  sacrifice  and  to  eat  the  lamb
or  kid,  bringing  at  the  same  time  also  another  offering  with
them.2  Lastly,  it  was  also  ordered  that  if  any  man  were
unclean  at  the  time  of  the  regular  Passover,  or  "  in  a  journey
afar  off,"  he  should  celebrate  it  a  month  later.^

The  Mishnah  ^  contains  the  following,  as  the  distinctions
between  the  "  Egyptian  "  and  the  "  Permanent  "  Passover  :
'*  The  Egyptian  Passover  was  selected  on  the  loth,  and  the
blood  was  to  be  sprinkled  with  a  sprig  of  hyssop  on  the
lintel  and  the  two  door-posts,  and  it  was  to  be  eaten  in  haste
in  the  first  night ;  but  the  Permanent  Passover  is  observed
all  the  seven  days ;"  L  e.,  the  use  of  unleavened  cakes  was,
on  its  first  observance,  enjoined  only  for  that  one  night,
though,  from  Israel's  haste,  it  must,  for  several  days,  have  been
the  only  available  bread  ;  while  afterwards  its  exclusive  use  was
ordered  during  the  whole  week.  Similarly,  also,  the  journey  of
the  children  of  Israel  commenced  on  the  15th  of  Nisan,  while  in
after-times  that  day  was  observed  as  a  festival  like  a  Sabbath.^

*  I  Cor.  V.  7,  8.         2  £x.  xxxiv.  18-20  ;  Deut.  xvi.  2,  16,  17.         ^  Numb.  ix.  9- 1 1.
*  Pes.  ix.  5.  5  Ex.  xii.  16 ;  Lev.  xxiii.  7 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  18.


1 82        Tlie  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

To  these  distinctions  the  following  are  also  added  :}  In  Egypt
the  Passover  was  selected  on  the  loth,  and  killed  on  the  14th,
and  they  did  not,  on  account  of  the  Passover,  incur  the  penalty
of  "  cutting  off,*'  as  in  later  generations  ;  of  the  Egyptian  Pass-
over it  was  said,  **  Let  him  and  his  neighbour  next  unto  his
house  take  it,"  while  afterwards  the  Passover-companies  might
be  indiscriminately  chosen  ;  in  Egypt  it  was  not  ordered  to
sprinkle  the  blood  and  burn  the  fat  on  the  altar,  as  afterwards  ;
at  the  first  Passover  it  was  said,  **  None  of  you  shall  go  out
of  the  door  of  his  house  until  the  morning,"  which  did  not
apply  to  later  times ;  in  Egypt  it  was  slain  by  every  one
in  his  own  house,  while  afterwards  it  was  slain  by  all  Israel
in  one  place  ;  lastly,  formerly  where  they  ate  the  Passover,
there  they  lodged,  but  afterwards  they  might  eat  it  in  one,
and  lodge  in  another  place.

Scripture  records  that  the  Passover  was  kept  the  second
year  after  the  Exodus,^  and  then  not  again  till  the  Israelites
actually  reached  the  promised  land  ;^  but,  as  the  Jewish
commentators  rightly  observe,  this  intermission  was  directed
by  God  Himself*  After  that,  public  celebrations  of  the
Passover  are  only  mentioned  once  during  the  reign  of
Solomon,^  again  under  that  of  Hezekiah,^  at  the  time  of
Josiah,^  and  once  more  after  the  return  from  Babylon  under
Ezra.^  On  the  other  hand,  a  most  significant  allusion  to  the
typical  meaning  of  the  Passover-blood,  as  securing  immunity
from  destruction,  occurs  in  the  prophecies  of  Ezekiel,^  where
*'  the  man  clothed  with  linen  "  is  directed  to  "  set  a  mark  upon
the  foreheads  "  of  the  godly  (like  the  first  Passover-mark),  so

1   Tos,  Pes,  viii.  *  Numb.  ix.  1-5.  ^  josh.  v.  10.

*  Ex.  xii.  25  ;  xiii.  5.         *  2  Chron.  viii.  13.  «  2  Chron.  xxx.  15.

'  2  Kings  xxiii.  21,  •  Ezra  vi.  19.  •  Ezek.  ix.  4-6,


The  Passoiper.  183

that  they  who  were  to  **  slay  utterly  old  and  young "  might
not  "  come  near  any "  of  them.  The  same  symbolic  refer-
ence and  command  occur  in  the  book  of  Revelation/  in
regard  to  those  who  have  been  "sealed  as  the  servants  of
our  God  in  their  foreheads."

But  the  inference  that  the  Passover  was  only  celebrated  on
the  occasions  actually  mentioned  in  Scripture  seems  the  less
warranted,  that  in  later  times  it  was  so  punctiliously  and
universally  observed.  We  can  form  a  sufficiently  accurate
idea  of  all  the  circumstances  attending  it  at  the  time  of  our
Lord.  On  the  14th  of  Nisan  every  Israelite  who  was  physi-
cally able,  not  in  a  state  of  Levitical  uncleanness,  nor  further
distant  from  the  city  than  fifteen  miles,  was  to  appear  in
Jerusalem.  Though  women  were  not  legally  obliged  to  go
up,  we  know  from  Scripture,^  and  from  the  rules  laid  down  by
Jewish  authorities,^  that  such  was  the  common  practice.  Indeed,
it  was  a  joyous  time  for  all  Israel.  From  all  parts  of  the  land
and  from  foreign  countries  the  festive  pilgrims  had  come  up  in
bands,  singing  their  pilgrim  psalms,  and  bringing  with  them
burnt-  and  peace-offerings,  according  as  the  Lord  had  blessed
them  ;  for  none  might  appear  empty  before  Him.*  How  large
the  number  of  worshippers  was,  may  be  gathered  from  Josephus,
who  records  that,  when  Cestius  requested  the  high-priest  to
make  a  census,  in  order  to  convince  Nero  of  the  importance
of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  number  of  lambs
slain  was  found  to  be  256,500,  which,  at  the  lowest  computa-
tion of  ten  persons  to  every  sacrificial  lamb,  would  give  a
population   of    2,565,000,   or   as   Josephus   himself    puts   it,

*  Rev.  vii.  2,  3 ;  ix.  4.  *  i  Sam.  i.  3-7  ;  Luke  il  41,  42.

*  Jos.  Wars^  vi.  9-3  ;  and  Misknah  Fes,  ix.  4,  for  ex.

*  Ex.  xxiii.  15;  Deut.  xvi.  16,  17.


184        The  Temple^  its  Alinistry  and  Services.

2,700,200  persons,  while  on  an  earlier  occasion  (a.D.  65)  he
computes  the  number  present  at  not  fewer  than  three  millions.*
Of  course,  many  of  these  pilgrims  must  have  camped  out-
side the  city  walls.  *  Those  who  lodged  within  the  walls  were
gratuitously  accommodated,  and  in  return  left  to  their  hosts
the  skins  of  the  Passover  lambs  and  the  vessels  which  they
had  used  in  their  sacred  services.  In  such  festive  "  company  •  *
the  parents  of  Jesus  went  to,  and  returned  from  this  feast;
"  every  year,**  taking  their  **  holy  child  "  with  them,  after  He
had  attained  the  age  of  twelve — strictly  in  accordance  with
Rabbinical  law  ( Yoma,  82  a) — -when  He  remained  behind,
"  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  doctors,  both  hearing  them  and
asking  them  questions."  ^  We  know  that  the  Lord  Him-r
self  afterwards  attended  the  Paschal  feast,  and  that  on  the
last  occasion  He  was  hospitably  entertained  in  Jerusalem,
apparently  by  a  disciple,^  although  He  seems  to  have  in-
tended spending  the  night  outside  the  city  walls.^

But  the  preparations  for  the  Passover  had  begun  long  before
the  14th  of  Nisan.  Already  a  month  previously  (on  the  15  th
of  Adar),  bridges  and  roads  had  been  repaired  for  the  use  of
the  pilgrims.  That  was  also  the  time  for  administering  the
testing  draught  to  women  suspected  of  adultery,  for  burning
the  red  heifer,  and  for  boring  the  ears  of  those  who  wished  to
remain  in  servitude— in  short,  for  making  all  kinds  of  pre-

1  Jew,  Wars,  vi.  9,  3 ;  ii.  14,  3.  These  computations,  being  derived  from
official  documents,  can  scarcely  have  been  much  exaggerated.  Indeed,  Josephus
expressly  guards  himself  against  this  charge.

2  It  is  deeply  interesting  that  the  Talmud  (Pes,  53)  specially  mentions  Beth-
phage  and  Bethany  as  celebrated  for  their  hospitality  towards  the  festive  pilgrims.

2  Luke  ii.  41-49.  ^  Matt.  xxvi.  18;  Mark  xiv.  12-16;  Luke  xxii.  7-13.

•  Matt,  xxvi.  30,  36  J  Mark  xiv.  26,  32  ;  Luke  xxii.  39  j  John  xviii.  I.


The  Passover.  185

Iiminary  arrangements  before  the  festive  season  began.  One
of  these  is  specially  interesting  as  recalling  the  words  of  the
Saviour.  In  general,  cemeteries  were  outside  the  cities  ;  but
any  dead  body  found  in  the  field  was  (according  to  an  ordi-
nance which  tradition  traces  up  to  Joshua)  to  be  buried  on  the
spot  where  it  had  been  discovered.  Now,  as  the  festive  pilgrims
might  have  contracted  **  uncleanness  "  by  unwitting  contact
with  such  graves,  it  was  ordered  that  all  **  sepulchres  "  should
be  "  whitened  "  a  month  before  the  Passover.  It  was,  there-
fore, evidently  in  reference  to  what  He  actually  saw  going  on
around  Him  at  the  time  He  spoke,  that  Jesus  compared
the  Pharisees  "  unto  whited  sepulchres,  w^hich  indeed  appear
beautiful  outward,  but  are  within  full  of  dead  men's  bones,
and  of  all  uncleanness."  ^  Then,  two  weeks  before  Pesach,
and  at  the  corresponding  time  before  the  other  two  great
festivals,  the  flocks  and  herds  were  to  be  tithed,  and  also
the  Temple  treasury-chests  publicly  opened  and  emptied.
Lastly,  we  know  that  "  many  went  out  of  the  country  up
to  Jerusalem  before  the  Passover  to  purify  themselves."^  It  is
this  practice  which  finds  its  spiritual  application  in  regard  to
the  better  Passover,  when,  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul,^  **  whosoever
shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord,  unworthily,
shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord.  But  let
a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  tluii  bread,  and
drink  of  that  cup."

The  modern  synagogue  designates  the  Sabbath  before
the  Passover  as  "the  Great  Sabbath,"  and  prt  crbcs  par-
ticular prayers  and  special  instruction  with  a  view  to  the
coming  festival.  For,  according  to  Jewish  tradition,  at  the
original  institution  of  the  Passover,*  the   loth  of  Nisan,  on

*  Matt,  xxiii.  27.         2  j^j^^  ^i,  55.         '  i  Cor,  xi.  27,  28,  *  Ex.  xii.  3.


1 86       The  Temple y  its  Ministry  and  Services.

which  the  sacrifice  was  to  be  selected,  had  fallen  on  a
Sabbath.  But  there  is  no  evidence  that  either  the  name
or  the  observance  of  this  *'  Great  Sabbath  "  had  been  in  use
at  the  time  of  our  Lord,  although  it  was  enjoined  to  teach
the  people  in  the  various  synagogues  about  the  Passover
during  the  month  which  preceded  the  festival.  There  is  %.lso
a  significant  tradition  that  some  were  wont  to  select  their
sacrificial  lamb  four  days  before  the  Passover,  and  to  keep
it  tied  in  a  prominent  place  within  view,  so  as  constantly  to
remind  them  of  the  coming  service.

We  have  already  explained  that  according  to  the  Rabbis,^
three  things  were  implied  in  the  festive  command  to
''appear  before  the  Lord  '* — "  Presence,"  the  "  Chagigah,"  and
*' Joyousness."  As  specially  applied  to  the  Passover,  the
first  of  these  terms  meant,  that  every  one  was  to  come  up  to
Jerusalem  and  to  offer  a  burnt-offering,  if  possible  on  the
first,  or  else  on  one  of  the  other  six  days  of  the  feast.  This
burnt-offering  was  to  be  taken  only  from  ''  Cholin  '*  (or  pro-
fane substance),  that  is,  from  such  as  did  not  otherwise  belong
to  the  Lord,  either  as  tithes,  firstlings,  or  things  devoted,  etc.
The  Chagigah,  which  was  strictly  a  peace-offering,  might  be
twofold.  The  first  Chagigah  was  offered  on  the  14th  of
Nisan,  the  day  of  the  Paschal  sacrifice,  and  formed  afterwards
part  of  the  Paschal  Supper.  The  second  Chagigah  was
offered  on  the  15th  of  Nisan,  or  the  first  day  of  the  feast  of
unleavened  bread.  It  is  this  second  Chagigah  which  the
Jews  were  afraid  they  might  be  unable  to  eat,  if  they  con-
tracted defilement  in  the  judgment-hall  of  Pilate.^  In
reference  to  the  first  Chagigah,  the  Mishnah  lays  down  the
rule,  that  it  was  only  to  be  offered  if  the  Paschal  day
^  Chag.  ii.  I ;  vi.  2.  John  xviii.  28.


The  Passover.  187

fell  on  a  week-day,  not  on  a  Sabbath,  and  if  the  Paschal  lamb
alone  would  not  have  been  sufficient  to  give  a  satisfying
supper  to  the  company  which  gathered  around  it.^  As  in  the
case  of  all  other  peace-o^erings,  part  of  this  Chagigah  might
be  kept,  though  not  for  longer  than  one  night  and  two  days
from  its  sacrifice.  Being  a  voluntary  offering,  it  was  lawful  to
bring  it  from  sacred  things  (such  as  tithes  of  the  flock).  But
the  Chagigah  for  the  15th  of  Nisan  was  obligatory,  and  had
therefore  to  be  brought  from  *'  Cholin/'  The  third  duty
incumbent  on  those  who  appeared  at  the  feast  was  **  joyous-
ness/'  This  expression,  as  we  have  seen,  simply  referred  to
the  fact  that,  according  to  their  means,  all  Israel  were,  during
the  course  of  this  festival,  with  joyous  heart  to  offer  peace-
offerings,  which  might  be  chosen  from  sacred  things.^  Thus
the  sacrifices  which  every  Israelite  was  to  offer  at  the  Passover
were,  besides  his  share  in  the  Paschal  lamb,  a  burnt  offering,
the  Chagigah  (one  or  two),  and  offerings  of  joyousness — all  as
God  had  blessed  each  household.  As  stated  in  a  previous
chapter,  all  the  twenty-four  courses,  into  which  the  priests  were
arranged,  ministered  in  the  Temple  on  this,  as  on  the  other
great  festivals,  and  they  dislributed  among  themselves  alike
what  fell  to  them  of  the  festive  sacrifices  and  the  shewbread.
But  the  course  which,  in  its  proper  order,  was  on  duty  for  the
week,  alone  offered  all  votive,  and  voluntary,  and  the  public
sacrifices  for  the  whole  congregation,  such  as  those  of  the
morning  and  the  evening.^

The  special  preparations  for  the  Passover  commenced  on
the  evening  of  the  13th  of  Nisan,  with  which,  according  to
Jewish  reckoning,  the  14th  began,  the  day  being  always
computed  from  evening  to  evening.^     Then  the  head  of  the

^  Pes,  vi.  4.  2  Deut.  xxvii.  7.  ^  Succah  v.  7.

*  The  article  in  Kitto's  Cycl.  (3rd  edition),  vol.  iii.  p.  425,  calls  this  day,  *'the


1 88       The  Temple,  its  Mijiistry  and  Services.

j  house  was  to  search  with  a  lighted  candle  all  places  where
\  leaven  was  usually  kept,  and  to  put  what  of  it  he  found  in  the
house  in  a  safe  place,  whence  no  portion  could  be  carried
away  by  any  accident.  Before  doing  this,  he  prayed  :
**  Blessed  art  Thou,. Jehovah,  our  God,  King  of  the  Universe,
who  hast  sanctified  us  by  Thy  commandments,  and  com-
manded us  to  remove  the  leaven."  And  after  it  he  said :
"  All  the  leaven  that  is  in  my  possession,  that  which  I  have
seen  and  that  which  I  have  not  seen,  be  it  null,  be  it  accounted
as  the  dust  of  the  earth."  The  search  itself  was  to  be  accom-
plished in  perfect  silence  and  with  a  lighted  candle.  To  this
search  the  apostle  may  have  referred  in  the  admonition  to
**  purge  out  the  old  leaven."^  Jewish  tradition  sees  a  reference
to  this  search  with  candles  in  Zeph.  i.  12  :  "  And  it  shall  come  to
pass  at  that  time  that  I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  candles."
If  the  leaven  had  not  been  removed  on  the  evening  of  the
13th,  it  might  still  be  done  on  the  forenoon  of  the  14th  of
JSfisan.  The  question  what  substances  constituted  leaven  was
thus  solved.  The  unleavened  cakes,  which  were  to  be  the  only
bread  used  during  the  feast,   might  be   made  of  these  five


preparation  for  the  Passover,"  and  confounds  it  with  John  xix.  14.  But  from  the
evening  of  the  14th  to  that  of  the  15th  is  never  called  in  Jewish  writings  **the
preparation  for,"  but  ''the  eve  of,  the  Passover."  Moreover,  the  period  described
in  John  xix.  14  was  after,  not  before,  the  Passoven  Dean  Al ford's  notes  on  this
passage,  and  on  Matt.  xxvi.  17,  suggest  a  number  of  needless  difficulties,  and  con-
tain inaccuracies,  due  to  a  want  of  sufficient  knowledge  of  Hebrew  authorities.  In
ittempting  an  accurate  chronology  of  these  days,  it  must  always  be  remembered
that  the  Passover  was  sacrificed  between  the  evenings  of  the  14th  and  the  15th
of  Nisan  ;  that  is,  before  the  close  of  the  14th  and  the  beginning  of  the  15th.  The
Paschal  Supper,  however,  took  place  on  the  15th  itself  (that  is,  according  to
Jewish  reckoning — the  day  beginning  as  the  first  stars  became  visible).  "  The
preparation  "  in  John  xix.  14  means,  as  in  verse  31,  the  preparation-day  for  the
Sabbath,  and  the  "  Passover,"  as  in  xviii.  39,  the  whole  Paschal  week.
*  I  Cor.  V.  7.


The  Passover.  189

kinds  of  grain — wheat,  barley,  spelt,  oats,  and  rye — the
cakes  being  prepared  before  fermentation  had  begun.  Any-
thing prepared  of  these  five  kinds  of  grain — but  only  of
these — would  come  within  range  of  the  term  "leaven,"  that
is,  if  kneaded  with  water,  but  not  if  made  with  any  other
fluid,  such  as  fruit-liquor,  etc.

Early  on  the  forenoon  of  the  14th  of  .Nisan  the  feast  of
the  Passover  may  be  said  to  have  begun.  In  Galilee,  no
work  was  done  all  that  day  ;  in  Judaea  it  was  continued  till
mid-day;  the  rule,  however,  being  that  no  new  work  was  to
be  commenced,  though  that  which  was  in  hand  might  be
carried  on.  The  only  exception  to  this  was  in  the  case  of
tailors,  barbers,  and  those  engaged  in  the  laundry.  Even
earlier  than  mid-day  of  the  14th  it  was  no  longer  lawful  to
eat  leaven.  The  strictest  opinion  fixes  ten  o'clock  as  the
latest  hour  when  leaven  might  be  eaten,  the  more  lax  eleven.
From  that  hour  to  twelve  o'clock  it  was  required  to  abstain
from  leaven,  while  at  twelve  it  was  to  be  solemnly  destroyed,
either  by  burning,  immersing  it  in  water,  or  scattering  it
to  the  winds.  To  secure  strict  obedience  and  uniformity,
the  exact  time  for  abstaining  from  and  for  destroying  the
leaven  was  thus  made  known :  "  They  laid  two  desecrated
cakes  of  a  thank-offering  on  a  bench  in  the  porch  (of  the
Temple).  So  long  as  they  lay  there,  all  the  people  might
eat  (leavened)  ;  when  one  of  them  was  removed,  they
abstained  from  eating,  but  they  did  not  burn  (the  leaven)  ;
when  both  were  removed,  all  the  people  burnt  (the
leaven)."^

The    next   care  was   to   select   a   proper    Paschal    lamb,
which,  of  course,  must  be  free  from  all  blemish,  and  neither

^  Pes.  i.  5.


IQO       The   Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

less  than  eight  days,  nor  more  than  exactly  one  year,  old.
I  Each  Paschal  lamb  was  to  serve  for  a  "  company,"  which
\  was  to  consist  of  not  less  than  ten,  nor  of  more  than  twenty
; persons.  The  company  at  the  "Lord's  Passover  Supper"
consisted  of  Himself  and  His  disciples.  Two  of  them,  Peter
and  John,  the  Master  had  sent  early  forward  to  "prepare
the  Passover,"  that  is,  to  see  to  all  that  was  needful  for  the
due  observance  of  the  Paschal  Supper,  especially  the  pur-
chase and  sacrifice  of  the  Paschal  lamb.  Probably  they  may
have  purchased  it  in  the  Holy  City,  though  not,  as  in  the
majority  of  cases,  within  the  Temple-court  itself,  where  a
brisk  and  very  profitable  traffic  in  all  such  offerings  was
carried  on  by  the  priests.  For  against  this  the  Lord  Jesus
had  inveighed  only  a  few  days  before,  when  He  "cast  out  all
them  that  sold  and  bought  in  the  Temple,  and  overthrew
the  tables  of  the  money-changers,"^  to  the  astonishment  and
indignation  of  those  who  would  intensely  resent  His  inter-
ference with  their  authority  and  gains.^

While  the  Saviour  still  tarried  with  the  other  disciples  out-
side the  city,  Peter  and  John  were  completing  their  prepara-
tions. They  followed  the  motley  crowd,  all  leading  their
sacrificial  lambs  up  the  Temple-mount.  Here  they  were
grouped  into  three  divisions.  Already  the  evening  sacrifice
had  been  offered.  Ordinarily  it  was  slain  at  2.30  P.M.,  and
off'ered  at  about  3.30.  But  on  the  eve  of  the  Passover,  as  we
have  seen,  it  was  killed  an  hour  earlier ;  and  if  the  14th  of
Nisan  fell  on  a  Friday — or  rather  from  Thursday  at  eve  to  Fri-
day at  eve — two  hours  earlier,  so  as  to  avoid  any  needless  breach
of  the  Sabbath.  On  the  occasion  to  which  we  refer  the  evening
sacrifice  had  been  slain  at  1.30,  and  off*ered  at  2.30.  But  before
*  Matt.  xxi.  12,  13.  2  John  ii.  13-18.


The  Passover.  191

the   incense  was   burned   or   the   lamps  were   trimmed,  the
Paschal   sacrifice  had  to  be  offered.^      It  was  done  on  this
wise  : — The   first   of  the   three   festive   divisions,  with   their
Paschal  lambs,  was  admitted  within  the  Court  of  the  Priests.
Each  division  must  consist  of  not   less  than  thirty  persons
(3  X   10,  the  symbolical  number  of  the  Divine  and  of  com-
pleteness).   Immediately  the  massive  gates  were  closed  behind    -
them.     The  priests  drew  a  threefold  blast  from  their  silver
trumpets  when  the  Passover  was  slain.     Altogether  the  scene
was  most  impressive.     All  along  the  Court  up  to  the  altar  of
burnt-offering  priests    stood    in  two  rows,  the   one   holding
golden,  the  other  silver  bowls.     In  these   the   blood  of  the
Paschal    lambs,    which    each    Israelite   slew   for   himself  (as
representative  of  his  company  at  the  Paschal  Supper),  was
caught  up  by  a  priest,  who  handed  it  to  his  colleague,  receiv-
ing back   an  empty  bowl,  and  so  the  bowls  with  the  blood
were  passed  up  to  the  priest  at  the  altar,  who  jerked  it  in  one
jet  at  the  base  of  the  altar.     While  this  was  going  on,  a  most    •.
solemn  *'  hymn  "  of  praise  was  raised,  the  Levites  leading  in
song,  and  the  offerers  either  repeating  after  them  or  merely     '
responding.      Every  first  line  of  a  Psalm  was  repeated    by
the  people,  while  to  each  of  the  others  they  responded  by  a
"  Hallelujah,'*  or  "  Praise    ye    the   Lord."      This  service   of
song  consisted  of  the  so-called  "  Hallel,"  which   comprised
Psalms  cxiii.  to  cxviii.     Thus,

The  Levites  began  :  "  Hallelu  J  ah  "  (Praise  ye  the  Lord).

The  people  repeated  :  ''Hallelu  Jah!'

The  Levites :  *'  Praise  {Hallelu),  O  ye  servants  of  Jehovah.*'

1  According  to  the  Talmud,  *'the  daily  (evening)  sacrifice  precedes  that  of  the  \
Paschal  lamb  ;  the  Paschal  lamb  the  burning  of  the  incense ;  the  incense  ^lie  ]
trimming  of  the  lamps  "  (for  the  night).


ig2       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services

The  people  responded  :  **  Hallelu  Jah^^

The  Levites  :  **  Praise  {Hallelu)  the  name  of  Jehovah.**

The  people  responded:  *^  Halleht  Jah!^

Similarly,  when  Psa.  cxiii.  had  been  finished — Psa.  cxiv. :

The  Levites  :  "  When  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt."

The  people  repeated  :  **  When  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt"

The   Levites :    "  The   house   of  Jacob   froni   a   people   of

strange  language/*

The  people  responded  :  "  Hallelu  Jah!^

And  in  the  same  manner,   repeating   each  first  line  and

responding  at  the  rest,  till  they  came  to  Psa.  cxviii.,  when,

besides  the  first,  these  three  lines  were  also  repeated  by  the

people  (verses  25,  26)  :

"  Save  now,  I  beseech  Thee,  Jehovah."
*'  Oh,  Jehovah,  I  beseech  Thee,  send  now  prosperity  ; "  and
"  Blessed  be  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  Jehovah."
May  it  not  be  that  to  this  solemn  and  impressive  *'  hymn  "

corresponds  the  Alleluia  song   of  the  redeemed  Church  in

heaven,  as  described  in  Rev.  xix.  I,  3,  4,  6 }

CThe  singing  of  the  "  Hallel "  at  the  Passover  dates  from
very  remote  antiquity.  The  Talmud  dwells  on  its  peculiar
suitableness  for  the  purpose,  since  it  not  only  recorded  the
goodness  of  God  towards  Israel,  but  especially  their  deliver-
ance from  Egypt,  and  therefore  appropriately  opened  ^  with
*'  Praise  ye  Jehovah,  ye  servants  of  Jehovah" — and  no  longer
of  Pharaoh.  Hence  also  this  "  Hallel''  is  called  the  Egyptian,
or  "  the  Common,"  to  distinguish  it  from  the  great  "  Hallel,"
sung  on  very  rare  occasions,  which  comprised  Psalms  cxx.  to
cxxxvi.  According  to  the  Talmud,  the  "  Hallel "  recorded
five  things  :  *'  The  coming  out  of  Egypt,  the  dividing  of  the

^  Psa.  cxiii.


The  Passover.  193

sea.  the  giving  of  the  law,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and
the  lot  of  the  Messiah."  The  Egyptian  ''  Hallel,"  it  may  here
be  added,  was  altogether  sung  on  eighteen  days  and  on  one
night  in  the  year.  These  eighteen  days  were,  that  of  the
Passover  sacrifice,  the  Feast  of  Pentecost,  and  each  of  the
eight  days  of  the  Feasts  of  Tabernacles  and  of  the  Dedication
of  the  Temple.  The  only  night  in  which  it  was  recited
was  that  of  the  Paschal  Supper,  when  it  was  sung  by  every
Paschal  company  in  their  houses,  in  a  manner  which  will
hereafter  be  explained.

If  the  "  Hallel "  had  been  finished  before  the  service  of  one
division  was  completed,  it  was  repeated  a  second  and,  if  need-
ful, even  a  third  time.  The  Mishnah  remarks,  that  as  the
Great  Court  was  crowded  by  the  first  two  divisions,  it  rarely
happened  that  they  got  further  than  Psa.  cxvi.  before  the
services  of  the  third  division  were  completed.  Next,  the
sacrifices  were  hung  up  on  hooks  along  the  Court,  or  laid
on  staves  which  rested  on  the  shoulders  of  two  men  (on  Sab-
baths they  were  not  laid  on  staves),  then  flayed,  the  entrails
taken  out  and  cleansed,  and  the  inside  fat  separated,  put  in
a  dish,  salted,  and  placed  on  the  fire  of  the  altar  of  burnt-
ofi*ering.  This  completed  the  sacrifice.  The  first  division
of  off*erers  being  dismissed,  the  second  entered,  and  finally
the  third,  the  service  being  in  each  case  conducted  in  pre-
cisely the  same  manner.  Then  the  whole  service  concluded
by  burning  the  incense  and  trimming  the  lamps  for  the  night.

When  all  had  been  finished  in  the  Temple,  the  priests
washed  the  Great  Court,  in  which  so  much  sacrificial  blood
had  been  shed.  But  this  was  not  done  if  the  Passover  had
been  slain  on  the  Sabbath.  In  that  case,  also,  the  three
divisions  waited — the  first  in  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles,  the

o


194       T^^  Temple,  its  Mmistry  and  Services.

second  on  the  Chel,  and  the  third  in  the  Great  Court— so  as
not  needlessly  to  carry  their  burdens  on  the  Sabbath.

But,  as  a  general  rule,  the  religious  services  of  the  Passover,
like  all  positive  religious  injunctions,  **  made  void  the  Sabbath."
In  other  respects  the  Passover,  or  rather  the  15th  of  Nisan,
was  to  be  observed  like  a  Sabbath,  no  manner  of  work  being
allowed.  There  was,  however,  one  most  important  exception
to  this  rule.  It  was  permitted  to  prepare  the  necessary
articles  of  food  on  the  15th  of  Nisan.  This  explains  how
the  words  of  Jesus  to  Judas  during  the  Paschal  (not  the
Lord's)  Supper  could  be  misunderstood  by  the  disciples  as
implying  that  Judas,  ''  who  had  the  bag,"  was  to  *'  buy  those
things  "  that  they  had  "  need  of  against  the  feast.''  ^

It  was  probably  as  the  sun  was  beginning  to  decline  in  the
horizon  that  Jesus  and  the  other  ten  disciples  descended  once
more  over  the  Mount  of  Olives  into  the  Holy  City.  Before
them  lay  Jerusalem  in  her  festive  attire.  All  around  pilgrims
were  hastening  towards  it.  White  tents  dotted  the  sward,
gay  with  the  bright  flowers  of  early  spring,  or  peered  out
from  the  gardens  and  the  darker  foliage  of  the  olive  planta-
tions. From  the  gorgeous  Temple  buildings,  dazzling  in
their  snow-white  marble  and  gold,  on  which  the  slanting
rays  of  the  sun  were  reflected,  rose  the  smoke  of  the  altar
of  burnt-offering.  These  courts  were  now  crowded  with  eager
worshippers,  offering  for  the  last  time,  in  the  real  sense,  their
Paschal  lambs  The  streets  must  have  been  thronged  with
strangers,  and  the  flat  roofs  covered  with  eager  gazers,  who
either  feasted  their  eyes  with  a  first  sight  of  the  Sacred  City
for  which  they  had  so  often  longed,  or  else  once  more  rejoiced
in  view  of  the  well-remembered  localities.     It  was  the  last

*  John  xiii.  29.


The  Passover.  195

day- view  which  the  Lord  had  of  the  Holy  City — till  His
resurrection  !  Only  once  more  in  the  approaching  night  of
His  betrayal  was  He  to  look  upon  it  in  the  pale  light  of
the  full  moon.  He  was  going  forward  to  "  accomplish  His
death"  in  Jerusalem;  to  fulfil  type  and  prophecy,  and  to
offer  Himself  up  as  the  true  Passover  Lamb — *'  the  Lamb
of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  They  who
followed  Him  were  busy  with  many  thoughts.  They  knew
that  terrible  events  awaited  them,  and  they  had  only  a  few
days  before  been  told  that  these  glorious  Temple-build-
ings, to  which,  with  a  national  pride  not  unnatural,  they
had  directed  the  attention  of  their  Master,  were  to  become
desolate,  not  one  stone  being  left  upon  the  other.  Among
them,  revolving  his  dark  plans,  and  goaded  on  by  the  great
Enemy,  moved  the  betrayer.  And  now  they  were  within  the
city.  Its  Temple,  its  royal  bridge,  its  splendid  palaces,  its
busy  marts,  its  streets  filled  with  festive  pilgrims,  were  well
known  to  them,  as  they  made  their  way  to  the  house  where
the  guest-chamber  had  been  prepared  for  them.  Meanwhile
the  crowd  came  down  from  the  Temple-mount,  each  bearing
on  his  shoulders  the  sacrificial  lamb,  to  make  ready  for  the
Paschal  Supper.


CHAPTER  XII.

THE  PASCHAL  FEAST  AND  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.

'*  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to
the  disciples,  and  said,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  My  body.  And  He  took  the  cup,
and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  to  them,  saying.  Drink  ye  all  of  it ;  for  this  is  My
Dlood  of  the  New  Testament,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins."
Matt.  xxvi.  26-28.

JEWISH  tradition  has  this  curious  conceit :  that  the  most
important  events  in  Israel's  history  were  connected  with
the  Paschal  season.  Thus  it  is  said  to  have  been  on  the  pre-
sent Paschal  night  that,  after  his  sacrifice,  the  **  horror  of  great
darkness  "  fell  upon  Abraham  when  God  revealed  to  him  the
future  of  his  race.^  Similarly,  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  at
Passover  time  that  the  patriarch  entertained  his  heavenly
guests,  that  Sodom  was  destroyed  and  Lot  escaped,  and  that
the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  before  the  Lord.  More  than  that —
the  "  cake  of  barley  bread  "  seen  in  the  dream,  which  led  to
the  destruction  of  Midian's  host,  had  been  prepared  from  the
Omer,  presented  on  the  second  day  of  the  feast  of  unleavened
bread ;  just  as  at  a  later  period  alike  the  captains  of  Senna-
cherib and  the  king  of  Assyria,  who  tarried  at  Nob,  were  over-
taken by  the  hand  of  God  at  the  Passover  season.     It  was

^  Gen.  XV.


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  LorcTs  Supper.     197

at  the  Paschal  time  also  that  the  mysterious  handwriting
appeared  on  the  wall  to  declare  Babylon's  doom,  and  again  at
the  Passover  that  Esther  and  the  Jews  fasted,  and  that  wicked
Haman  perished.  And  so  also  in  the  last  days  it  would  be
the^  Paschal  night  when  the  final  judgments  should  come  upon
"  Edom,''  and  the  glorious  deliverance  of  Israel  take  place.
Hence  to  this  day,  in  every  Jewish  home,  at  a  certain  part  of
the  Paschal  service— just  after  the  "  third  cup,"  or  the  "  cup  of
blessing,"  has  been  drunk — the  door  is  opened  to  admit  Elijah
the  prophet  as  forerunner  of  the  Messiah,  while  appropriate
passages  are  at  the  same  time  read  which  foretell  the  destruc-
tion of  all  heathen  nations.  ^  It  is  a  remarkable  coincidence
that,  in  instituting  His  own  Supper,  the  Lord  Jesus  connected
the  symbol,  not  of  judgment,  but  of  His  dying  love,  with  this
**  third  cup."  But,  in  general,  it  may  be  interesting  to  know
that  no  other  service  contains  within  the  same  space  the  like
ardent  aspirations  after  a  return  to  Jerusalem  and  the  rebuild-
ing of  the  Temple,  nor  so  many  allusions  to  the  Messianic
hope,  as  the  liturgy  for  the  night  of  the  Passover  now  in  use
among  the  Jews.

If  we  could  only  believe  that  the  prayers  and  ceremonies
which  it  embodies  were  the  same  as  those  at  the  time  of  our
Lord,  we  should  have  it  in  our  power  to  picture  in  minutest
detail  all  that  took  place  when  He  instituted  His  own  Supper.
We  should  see  the  Master  as  He  presided  among  the  festive
company  of  His  disciples,  know  what  prayers  He  uttered,  and
at  what  special  parts  of  the  service,  and  be  able  to  reproduce
the  arrangement  of  the  Paschal  table  around  which  they  sat.

At  present  and  for  many  centuries  back  the  Paschal  Sup-
per has  been  thus  laid  out :   three  large  unleavened  cakes,
^  Psa.  Ixxix.  6 ;  Ixix.  25 ;  Lament.  iiL  66,


198      The  Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

wrapped  in  the  folds  of  a  napkin,  are  placed  on  a  salver,  and
on  them  the  seven  articles  necessary  for  the  *'  Passover  Supper"
are  ranged  in  this  manner :

A  roasted  Egg,  Roasted  Shankhone  of  a  Lamb,

(Instead  of  the  14th  day  Chagigah.)     ^         (Instead  of  the  Paschal  Lamb.)


Charoseth,
(To  represent  the  mortar  of  Egypt.)     ^


K  Lettuce.


Salt  Water,  Chervil  and  Parsley,

But,  unfortunately,  the  analogy  does  not  hold  good.  As  the
present  Passover  liturgy  contains  comparatively  very  few  relics
from  New  Testament  times,  so  also  the  present  arrangement
of  the  Paschal  table  evidently  dates  from  a  time  when  sacri-
fices had  ceased.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  by  far  the
greater  number  of  the  usages  observed  in  our  own  days  are
precisely  the  same  as  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  A  feeling,
not  of  gratified  curiosity,  but  of  holy  awe,  comes  over  us,  as
thus  we  are  able  to  pass  back  through  those  many  centuries
into  the  upper  chamber  where  the  Lord  Jesus  partook  of  that
Passover  which,  with  the  loving  desire  of  a  Saviour's  heart.  He
had  desired  to  eat  with  His  disciples.  The  leading  incidents
of  the  feast  are  all  vividly  before  us — the  handing  of  "  the  sop
dipped  in  the  dish,"  "  the  breaking  of  bread,"  "  the  giving
thanks," ''the  distributing  of  the  cup,"  and  "the  concluding
hymn."  Even  the  exact  posture  at  the  Supper  is  known  to
us.  But  the  words  associated  with  those  sacred  memories
come  with  a  strange  sound  when  we  find  in  Rabbinical
writings  the  "  Passover  lamb  "^  designated  as  "  His  body,"  or

1  The  words  of  the  Mishnah  (Pes.  x.  3)  are  :  "While  the  Sanctuary  stood,  they
brought  before  him  his  body  of  (or  for)  the  Passover."  The  term  **body''  also
sometimes  ineajis  *' substance."


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  Lord's  Stepper.     199

when  our  special  attention  is  called  to  the  cup  known  as  "  the
cup  of  blessing,  which  we  bless  ;"  nay,  when  the  very  term  for
the  Passover  liturgy  itself,  the  "  Haggadah,"^  which  means
"  showing  forth,"  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  used  by  St  Paul
in  describing  the  service  of  the  Lord's  Supper!^

Before  proceeding  further  we  may  state  that,  according  to
Jewish  ordinance,   the    Paschal  lamb  was  roasted  on  a  spit
made  of  pomegranate  wood,  the  spit  passing  right  through
from  mouth  to  vent.     Special  care  was  to  be  taken  that  in
roasting  the  lamb  did  not  touch  the  oven,  otherwise  the  part
touched  had  to  be  cut  away.     This  can  scarcely  be  regarded
as  an  instance  of  Rabbinical  punctiliousness.     It  was  intended
to  carry  out  the  idea  that  the  lamb  was  to  be  undefiled  by
any  contact  with  foreign  matter,  which  might  otherwise  have
adhered  to  it.     For  everything  here  was  significant,  and  the
slightest  deviation  would  mar  the  harmony  of  the  whole.     If
it  had  been  said,  that  not  a  bone  of  the  Paschal  lamb  was  to
be  broken,  that  it  was  not  to  be  "  sodden  at  all  with  water,
but  roast   with  fire^ — his  head  with  his   legs,  and  with  the
purtenance  thereof,"  and  that  none  of  it  was  to  "  remain  until
the  morning,"  all  that  had  not  been  eaten  being  burnt  with
fire*— such  ordinances  had  each   a   typical   object.      Of  all
other  sacrifices,  even  the  most  holy,^  it  alone  was  not  to  be
'''sodden,"  because  the  flesh  must  remain  pure,  without  the
admixture  even  of  water.     Then,  no  bone  of  the  lamb  was  to
be  broken  :  it  was  to  be  served  up  entire — none  of  it  was  to
be  left  over  ;  and  those  who  gathered  around  it  were  to  form

*  The  same  root  as  employed  in  Ex.  xiii.  8  :  **  And  thou  shalt  show  thy  son  in
tha<:  day,"  and  from  this  the  term  "  Haggadah"  has  unquestionably  been  derived,

*  I  Cor.  xi.  23-29.

3  This  could  certainly  have  borne  no  reference  to  the  haste  of  the  Exodus.

*  Ex.  xii.  8-ia  *  Lev.  vi.  21.


200       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services,

one  family.  All  this  was  intended  to  express  that  it  was  to
be  a  complete  and  unbroken  sacrifice,  on  the  ground  of  which
there  was  complete  and  unbroken  fellowship  with  the  God  who
had  passed  by  the  blood-sprinkled  doors,  and  with  those  who
together  formed  but  one  family  and  one  body.  "  The  cup  of
blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood
of  Christ  }  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  communion
of  the  body  of  Christ  t  For  we,  being  many,  are  one  bread
and  one  body  ;  for  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread." ^

Such  views  and  feelings,  which,  no  doubt,  all  truly  spiritual
Israelites  shared,  gave  its  meaning  to  the  Paschal  feast  at
which  Jesus  sat  down  with  His  disciples,  and  which  He
transformed  into  the  Lord's  Supper  by  linking  it  to  His
Person  and  Work.  Every  sacrifice,  indeed,  had  prefigured
His  Work ;  but  none  other  could  so  suitably  commemorate
His  death,  nor  yet  the  great  deliverance  connected  with  it,
and  the  great  union  and  fellowship  flowing  from  it.  For
other  reasons  also  it  was  specially  suited  to  be  typical  of
Christ.  It  was  a  sacrifice,  and  yet  quite  out  of  the  order  of
all  Levitical  sacrifices  For  it  had  been  instituted  and  observed
before  Levitical  sacrifices  existed  ;  before  the  Law  was  given  ;
nay,  before  the  Covenant  was  ratified  by  blood. ^  In  a  sense,
it  may  be  said  to  have  been  the  cause  of  all  the  later  sacrifices
of  the  Law,  and  of  the  Covenant  itself.  Lastly,  it  belonged
neither  to  one  nor  to  another  class  of  sacrifices  ;  it  was  neither
exactly  a  sin-offering  nor  a  peace-offering,  but  combined  them
both.  And  yet  in  many  respects  it  quite  differed  from  them.
In  short,  just  as  the  priesthood  of  Christ  was  a  real  Old
Testament  priesthood,  yet  not  after  the  order  of  Aaron,  but
after  the  earlier,  prophetic,  and  royal  order  of  Melchisedek,  so

*  I  Cor.  X.  1 6,  17.  2  Ex.  xxiv.


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  Lord's  Supper.     201

the  sacrifice  also  of  Christ  was  a  real  Old  Testament  sacrifice,
yet  not  after  the  order  of  Levitical  sacrifices,  but  after  that  ol
the  earlier  prophetic  Passover  sacrifice,  by  which  Israel  had
become  a  royal  nation.

As  the  guests  ^  gathered  around  the  Paschal  table,  they
came  no  longer,  as  at  the  first  celebration,  with  their  *'  loins
girded,"  with  shoes  on  their  feet,  and  a  staff"  in  their  hand —
that  is,  as  travellers  waiting  to  take  their  departure.  On  the
contrary,  they  were  arrayed  in  their  best  festive  garments,
joyous  and  at  rest,  as  became  the  children  of  a  king.  To
express  this  idea  the  Rabbis  also  insisted  that  the  Paschal
Supper — or  at  least  part  of  it — must  be  eaten  in  that
recumbent  position  with  which  we  are  familiar  from  the  New
Testament.  *'  For,"  say  they,  '^  they  use  this  leaning  posture,
as  free  men  do,  in  memorial  of  their  freedom."  And,  again,
**  Because  it  is  the  manner  of  slaves  to  eat  standing,  therefore
now  they  eat  sitting  and  leaning,  in  order  to  show  that  they
have  been  delivered  from  bondage  into  freedom."  And,
finally :  "  No,  not  the  poorest  in  Israel  may  eat  till  he  has  sat
down,  leaning."  But,  though  it  was  deemed  desirable  to  "  sit
leaning"  during  the  whole  Paschal  Supper,  it  was  only  abso-
lutely enjoined  while  partaking  of  the  bread  and  the  wine.
This  recumbent  posture  so  far  resembled  that  still  common  in
the  East,  that  the  body  rested  on  the  feet.  Hence,  also,  the
penitent  woman  at  the  feast  given  by  Simon  is  said  to  have
**  stood  at  His  feet,  behind,"  "weeping."^  At  the  same  time,
the  left  elbow  was  placed  on  the  table,  and  the  head  rested  on
the  hand,  sufficient  room  being  of  course  left  between  each  guest
for  the  free  movements  of  the  right  hand.     This  explains  in

*  The  Karaites  are  alone  in  not  admitting  women  to  the  Paschal  Supper.
2  Luke  vii.  38.


202       The  Templcy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

what  sense  John  ' 'was  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom,"  and  afterwards
"lying  on  Jesus*  breast,"  when  he  bent  back  to  speak  to  Him.^
The  use  of  wine  in  the  Paschal  Supper,^  though  not
mentioned  in  the  Law,  was  strictly  enjoined  by  tradition.
According  to  the  Jerusalem  Talmud,  it  was  intended  to
express  Israel's  joy  on  the  Paschal  night,  and  even  the  poorest
must  have  '^  at  least  four  cups,  though  he  were  to  receive  the
money  for  it  from  the  poor's  box."^  If  he  cannot  otherwise
obtain  it,  the  Talmud  adds,  "he  must  sell  or  pawn  his  coat,
or  hire  himself  out  for  these  four  cups  of  wine."  The  same
authority  variously  accounts  for  the  number  four  as  either
corresponding  to  the  four  words  used  about  Israel's  redemp-
tion (bringing  out,  delivering,  redeeming,  taking),  or  to  the
fourfold  mention  of  the  cup  in  connection  with  the  chief
butler's  dream,*  or  to  the  four  cups  of  vengeance  which  God
would  in  the  future  give  the  nations  to  drink,^  while  four  cups
of  consolation  would  be  handed  to  Israel,  as  it  is  written :
"  The  Lord  is  the  portion  of  my  cup  ; "  ®  "  My  cup  runneth
over  ; "  ^  "I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,*' ®  "  which,"  it  is
added,  "was  two" — perhaps  from  a  second  allusion  to  it  in
verse  17.  In  connection  with  this  the  following  parabolic  story
from  the  Talmud  may  possess  some  interest :  "  The  holy  and
blessed  God  will  make  a  feast  for  the  righteous  in  the  day  that
His  mercy  shall  be  shown  to  the  seed  of  Israel  After  they
have  eaten  and  drunk,  they  give  the  cup  of  blessing  to  Abra-
ham our  father.      But  he  saith  :    I  cannot  bless  it,  because

1  John  xiii.  23,  25.

2  Every  reader  of  the  Bible  knows  how  symbolically  significant  alike  the  vine
od  its  fruit  are  throughout  Scripture.    Over  the  entrance  to  the  Sanctuary  a  golden

vine  of  immense  proportions  was  suspended,

3  Pes.  X.  I.         *  Gen.  xl.  9-15.         *  Jer.  xxv.  15;  li.  7;  Psa.  Ixxv.  8;  xi  6.
•  Psa.  xvL  5.  '  Psa.  xxiii.  5.  ®  Psa.  cxvi.  13.


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  LorcTs  Supper.     203

Ishmael  came  from  me.  Then  he  gives  it  to  Isaac.  But  he
saith  :  I  cannot  bless  it,  because  Esau  came  from  me.  Then
he  hands  it  to  Jacob.  But  he  saith :  I  cannot  take  it,
because  I  married  two  sisters,  which  is  forbidden  in  the  Law.
He  saith  to  Moses  :  Take  it  and  bless  it.  But  he  replies  :  I
cannot,  because  I  was  not  counted  worthy  to  come  into  the
land  of  Israel,  either  alive  or  dead.  He  saith  to  Joshua :
Take  it  and  bless  it.  But  he  answers  :  I  cannot,  because  I
have  no  son.  He  saith  to  David  :  Take  it  and  bless  it.  And
he  replies :  I  will  bless  it,  and  it  is  fit  for  me  so  to  do,  as  it  is
written,  '  I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call  upon  the
name  of  the  Lord.' "

As  detailed  in  the  earliest  Jewish  record  of  ordinances — the
Mishnah — the  service  of  the  Paschal  Supper  was  exceedingly-
simple.  Indeed,  the  impression  left  on  the  mind  is,  that,
while  all  the  observances  were  fixed,  the  prayers,  with  some
exceptions  preserved  to  us,  were  free.  Rabbi  Gamaliel,  the
teacher  of  St.  Paul,  said  :^  ''Whoever  does  not  explain  three
things  in  the  Passover  has  not  fulfilled  the  duty  incum-
bent on  him.  These  three  things  are  :  the  Passover  lamb,
the  unleavened  bread,  and  the  bitter  herbs.  The  Passover
lamb  means  that  God  passed  over  the  blood-sprinkled  place
on  the  houses  of  our  fathers  in  Egypt ;  the  uiileavened  b7'ead
means  that  our  fathers  were  delivered  out  of  Egypt  (in  haste) ;
and  the  bitter  herbs  mean  that  the  Egyptians  made  bitter  the
lives  of  our  fathers  in  Egypt."  A  few  additional  particulars
are  necessary  to  enable  the  reader  to  understand  all  the
arrangements  of  the  Paschal  Supper.  From  the  time  of  the
evening-sacrifice  nothing  was  to  be  eaten  till  the  Paschal
Supper,  so  that  all  might  come  to  it  with  relish.  ^  It  is  a  moot
*  Pes.  X.  15.  '^  Pes,ii.\


204       '^^^  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

point,  whether  at  the  time  of  our  Lord  two,  or,  as  at  present,
three,  large  cakes  of  unleavened  bread  were  used  in  the  service.
The  Mishnah  mentions^  these  five  kinds  as  falling  within
the  designation  of  '*  bitter  herbs,"  viz.,  lettuce,  endive,  succory
(garden  endive  ?),  what  is  called  "  Charchavlna  ''  (tirtica^  beets  f),
and  horehound  (bitter  coriander  ?).  The  "  bitter  herbs  "  seem
to  have  been  twice  partaken  of  during  the  service,  once  dipped
in  salt  water  or  vinegar,  and  a  second  time  with  Charoseth,  a
compound  of  dates,  raisins,  etc.,  and  vinegar,  though  the
Mishnah  expressly  declares^  that  Charoseth  was  not  obli-
gatory. Red  wine  alone  was  to  be  used  at  the  Paschal
Supper,  and  always  mixed  with  water. ^  Each  of  the  four  cups
must  contain  at  least  the  fourth  of  a  quarter  of  an  hin  (the
hin  =  one  gallon  two  pints).  Lastly,  it  was  a  principle  that,
after  the  Paschal  meal,  they  had  no  Aphikomen  (after-dish),  an
expression  which  may  perhaps  best  be  rendered  by  "  dessert."
The  Paschal  Supper  itself  commenced  by  the  head  of  ''  the
company"  taking  the  first  cup  of  wine  in  his  hand,  and
*'  giving  thanks  "  over  it  in  these  words  :  **  Blessed  art  Thou,
Jehovah  our  God,  who  hast  created  the  fruit  of  the  vine!
Blessed  art  Thou,  Jehovah  our  God,  King  of  the  Universe,
who  hast  chosen  us  from  among  all  people,  and  exalted  us
from  among  all  languages,  and  sanctified  us  with  Thy  com-
mandments !  And  Thou  hast  given  us,  O  Jehovah  our  God,  in
love,  the  solemn  days  for  joy,  and  the  festivals  and  appointed
seasons   for  gladness  ;   and  this    the   day   of    the   feast    of

^  Pes.  ii.  6.  *  Pes,  x.  3.

3  Of  this  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubt.  Indeed,  the  following  quotation
from  the  Mishnah  [Pes,  vii.  13)  might  even  induce  one  to  believe  that  warm  water
was  mixed  with  the  wine:  *'If  two  companies  eat  (the  Passover)  in  the  same
liouse,  the  one  turns  its  face  to  one  side,  the  other  to  the  other,  and  the  kettle
(warming  kettle)  stands  between  them.'*


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  Lord's  Stepper.     205

unleavened  bread,  the  season  of  our  freedom,  a  holy  convoca-
tion, the  memorial  of  our  departure  from  Egypt.  For  us  hast
Thou  chosen  ;  and  us  hast  Thou  sanctified  from  among  all
nations,  and  Thy  holy  festivals  with  joy  and  with  gladness
hast  Thou  caused  us  to  inherit.  Blessed  art  Thou,  O  Jehovah,
who  sanctifiest  Israel  and  the  appointed  seasons  !  Blessed
art  Thou,  Jehovah,  King  of  the  Universe,  who  hast  preserved
us  alive  and  sustained  us  and  brought  us  to  this  season  ! "  ^

The  first  cup  of  wine  was  then  drunk,  and  each  washed  his
hands.*  It  was  evidently  at  this  time  that  the  Saviour  in  His
self-humiliation  proceeded  also  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet.^
Our  Authorised  Version  wrongly  translates  verse  2  by,  ''  and
supper  being  ended,"  instead  of  "  and  when  supper  had  come,"
or  "was  begun."  Similarly,  it  was,  in  all  probability,  in
reference  to  the  first  cup  that  Luke  gives  the  following
account:*  "And  He  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and
said,  Take  this,  and  divide  it  among  yourselves  " — the  "  cup
of  blessing,"  which  was  the  third,  and  formed  part  of  the  new
institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  being  afterwards  mentioned
inverse  20.  In  washing  their  hands  this  customary  prayer
was  repeatecf :  "  Blessed  art  Thou,  Jehovah  our  God,  who  hast
sanctified  us  with  Thy  commandments,  and  hast  enjoined  us
concerning  the  washing  of  our  hands."  Two  different  kinds
of  "  washing  "  were  prescribed  by  tradition — "  dipping  "  and
**  pouring."  At  the  Paschal  Supper  the  hands  were  to  be
'*  dipped  "  in  water.  ^

1  Such,  according  to  the  best  criticism,  were  the  words  of  this  prayer  at  the  time
of  Christ.  But  I  must  repeat  that  in  regard  to  many  of  these  prayers  I  cannot
help  suspecting  that  they  rather  indicate  the  spirit  and  direction  of  a  prayer  than
embody  the  ipsissima  verba.

'  The  modern  practice  of  the  Jews  slightly  differs  from  the  ancient  here,  and  in
some  other  little  matters  of  detail.  ^  John  xiii.  5.  *  Luke  xxii.  17.

^  The  distinction  is  also  interesting  as  explaining  Mark  vii.  3.     For  when  water


2c6        The  Temple^  its  Mmistry  and  Services.

These  preliminaries  ended,  the  Paschal  table  was  brougM
forward.  The  president  of  the  feast  first  took  some  of  the
herbs,  dipped  them  in  salt  water,  ate  of  them,  and  gave  to
the  others.  Immediately  after  it,  all  the  dishes  were  removed
from  the  table  (as  it  was  thought  so  strange  a  proceeding  would
tend  to  excite  the  more  curiosity),  and  then  the  second  cup
was  filled.  A  very  interesting  ceremony  now  took  place.  It
had  been  enjoined  in  the  law  that  at  each  Paschal  Supper  the
father  was  to  show  his  son  the  import  of  this  festival  By  way
of  carrying  out  this  duty,  the  son  (or  else  the  youngest)  was
directed  at  this  particular  part  of  the  service  to  make  inquiry  ;
and,  if  the  child  were  too  young  or  incapable,  the  father  would
do  it  for  him.

The  son  asks  :  ''Why  is  this  night  distinguished  from  all  other
nights  ?  For  on  all  other  nights  we  eat  leavened  or  unleavened
bread,  but  on  this  night  only  unleavened  bread  ?  On  all
other  nights  we  eat  any  kind  of  herbs,  but  on  this  night  only
bitter  herbs?  On  all  other  nights  we  eat  meat  roasted,
stewed,  or  boiled,  but  on  this  night  only  roasted }  On  all
other  nights  we  dip  (the  herbs)  only  once,  but  on  this  night
twice  ? "  Thus  far  according  to  the  earliest  and  most  trust-
worthy tradition.  It  is  added  :  ^  '^  Then  the  father  instructs
his  child  according  to  the  capacity  of  his  knowledge,  beginning
with  our  disgrace  and  ending  with  our  glory,  and  expounding
to  him  from, '  A  Syrian,  ready  to  perish,  was  my  father,'  till  he


was  poured  on  the  hands,  they  had  to  be  lifted,  yet  so  that  the  water  should
neither  run  up  above  the  wrist,  nor  back  again  upon  the  hand  ;  best,  therefore,  by
doubling  the  fingers  into  a  fist.  Hence  (as  Lightfoot  rightly  remarks)  Mark  vii.  3,
which  should  be  translated  :  *'  For  the  Pharisees  ....  except  they  wash  their
hands  with  the  fist,  eat  not,  holding  the  tradition  of  the  elders.*'  The  rendering
of  our  Authorised  Version,  **  except  they  wash  oft,"  has  evidently  no  meaning,
^  Mishnahf  Fes,  x.  4.


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  Lord's  Supper.     207

Has  explained  all  through,  to  the  end  of  the  whole  section."'
In  other  words,  the  head  of  the  house  was  to  relate  the  whole
national  history,  commencing  with  Terah,  Abraham's  father,
and  telling  of  his  idolatry,  and  continuing,  in  due  order,  the
story  of  Israel  up  to  their  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  the
giving  of  the  Law ;  and  the  more  fully  he  explained  it  all,
the  better.  ^

This  done,  the  Paschal  dishes  were  brought  back  on  the
table.     The  president  now  took  up  in  succession  the  dish  with
the  Passover  lamb,  that  with  the  bitter  herbs,  and  that  with
the  unleavened  bread,  and   briefly  explained  the  import  of
each ;  for,  according  to   Rabbi  Gamaliel :  **  From  generation
to  generation  every  man  is  bound  to  look  upon  himself  not
otherwise  than  if  he  had  himself  come  forth  out  of  Egypt.    For
so  it  is  written,^  *  And  thou   shalt  show  thy  son  in  that  day,
saying.  This  is  done  because  of  that  which  Jehovah  did  unto
me  when  I  came  forth  out  of  Egypt.'     Therefore,"  continues
the  Mishnahy  giving  the  very  words  of  the  prayer  used,  '*  we
are  bound  to  thank,  praise,  laud,  glorify,  extol,  honour,  bless,
exalt,  and  reverence  Him,  because  He  hath  wrought  for  our
fathers,  and  for  us  all  these  miracles.     He  brought  us  forth
from  bondage  into  freedom,  from  sorrow  into  joy,  from  mourn-
ing to  a  festival,  from  darkness  to  a  great  light,  and  from
slavery  to  redemption.     Therefore  let  us  sing  before   Him  :
Hallelujah  !  "     Then  the  first  part  of  the  "  Hallel "  was  sung,
comprising  Psalms  cxiii.  and  cxiv.,  with  this  brief  thanksgiving
at  the  close  :  "  Blessed  art  Thou,  Jehovah  our  God,  King  of  the
Universe,  who  hast  redeemed  us  and  redeemed  our  fathers
from  Egypt."     Upon  this  the  second  cup  was  drunk.     Hands
were  now  washed  a  second  time,  with  the  same  prayer  as

*  Pent.  XXVI.  5-1 1.  *  Ex.  xiii.  8.


2o8        The  Temple,  its  Miiiistry  and' Services.

before,  and  one  of  the  two  unleavened  cakes  broken  and
"thanks  given.'*

Rabbinical  authorities  distinctly  state  that  this  thanks-
giving was  to  follow,  not  to  precede,  the  breaking  of  bread,
because  it  was  the  bread  of  poverty,  **and  the  poor  have
not  whole  cakes,  but  broken  pieces."  The  distinction  is
important,  as  proving  that  since  the  Lord  in  instituting  His
Supper,  according  to  the  uniform  testimony  of  the  three
Gospels  and  of  St.  Paul,^  first  gave  thanks  and  then  brake
the  bread  (*'  having  given  thanks,  He  brake  it  "),  it  must  have
been  at  a  later  period  of  the  service.

Pieces  of  the  broken  cake  with  **  bitter  herbs "  between
them,  and  '^  dipped  "  in  the  Charoseth,  were  next  handed  to
each  in  the  company.  This,  in  all  probability,  was  "  the  sop  "
which,  in  answer  to  John's  inquiry  about  the  betrayer,  the
Lord  ''gave"  to  Judas.^  The  unleavened  bread  with  bitter
herbs  constituted,  in  reality,  the  beginning  of  the  Paschal
Supper,  to  which  the  first  part  of  the  service  had  only  served
as  a  kind  of  introduction.  But  as  Judas,  after  "  having  received
the  sop,  went  immediately  out,"  he  could  not  even  have  par-
taken of  the  Paschal  lamb,  far  less  of  the  Lord's  Supper.
The  solemn  discourses  of  the  Lord  recorded  by  St.  John'
may  therefore  be  regarded  as  His  last  "  table-talk,"  and  'the
intercessory  prayer  that  followed*  as  His  "grace  after  meat."

The  Paschal  Supper  itself  consisted  of  the  unleavened
bread  with  bitter  herbs,  of  the  so-called  Chagigah,  or  festive
offering  (when  brought),  and,  lastly,  of  the  Paschal  lamb
itself.     After  that  nothing  more  was  to  be  eaten,  so  that  the

1  Matt.  xxvi.  26  ;  Mark  xiv.  22  :  Luke  xxii.  19 ;  I  Cor.  xi.  24.

2  John  xiii.  25,  etc.  ;  compare  Matt.  xxvi.  21,  etc.  ;  Mark  xiv.  18,  etc
*  John  xiii.  31  ;  xvi.  *  John  "vii.


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  Lord's  Supper.     209

flesh  of  the  Paschal  Sacrifice  might  be  the  last  meat  partaken
of.  But  since  the  cessation  of  the  Paschal  Sacrifice  the  Jews
conclude  the  Supper  with  a  piece  of  unleavened  cake,  which
they  call  the  Aphikomen^  or  after-dish.  Then,  having  again
washed  hands,  the  third  cup  is  filled,  and  grace  after  meat''
said.^  Now,  it  is  very  remarkable  that  our  Lord  seems  so  far*
to  have  anticipated  the  present  Jewish  practice  that  He  brake'
the  bread  ''when  He  had  given  thanks,''  ^  instead  of  adhering
to  the  old  injunction  of  not  eating  anything  after  the  Passover
lamb.  And  yet  in  so  doing  He  only  carried  out  the  spirit  of
the  Paschal  feast.  For,  as  we  have  already  explained,  it  was
commemorative  and  typical.  It  commemorated  an  event
which  pointed  to  and  merged  in  another  event — even  the
offering  of  the  better  Lamb,  and  the  better  freedom  con-
nected with  that  sacrifice.  Hence,  after  the  night  of  His
betrayal,  the  Paschal  lamb  could  have  no  further  meaning,
and  it  was  right  that  the  commemorative  Aphikomen  should
take  its  place.  The  symbolical  cord,  if  the  figure  may  be
allowed,  had  stretched  to  its  goal — the  offering  up  of  the
Lamb  of  God ;  and  though  again  continued  from  that  point
onwards  till  His  second  coming,  yet  it  was,  in  a  sense,  as  from
a  new  beginning.

Immediately  afterwards  the  third  cup  was  drunk,  a  special
blessing  having  been  spoken  over  it.  There  cannot  be  any
reasonable  doubt  that  this  was  the  cup  which  our  Lord  con-
nected with  His  own  Supper.  It  is  called  in  Jewish  writings,
just  as  by  St.  Paul,^  "  the  cup  of  blessing,"  partly  because  it  and
the  first  cup  required  a  special  "  blessing,"  and  partly  because
it  followed  on  the  "  grace  after  meat."  Indeed,  such  impor-
tance attached  to  it,  that  the  Talmud  ^  notes  ten  peculiarities,

^  See  I  Cor.  xi   24,  and  the  Gospels.  ^  i  Qgr.  x.  16.  ^  Berac,  51,  i.

P


2IO       The  Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

too  minute  indeed  for  our  present  consideration,  but  sufficient
to  show  the  special  value  set  upon  it.^  The  service  concluded
with  the  fourth  cup,  over  which  the  second  portion  of  the
"  Hallel  "  was  sung,  consisting  of  Psalms  cxv.,  cxvi.,  cxvii.,  and
cxviii.,  the  whole  ending  with  the  so-called  *'  blessing  of  the
song,"  which  comprised  these  two  brief  prayers :  "  All  Thy
works  shall  praise  Thee,  Jehovah  our  God.  And  Thy  saints,
the  righteous,  who  do  Thy  good  pleasure,  and  all  Thy  people,
the  house  of  Israel,  with  joyous  song  let  them  praise,  and
bless,  and  magnify,  and  glorify,  and  exalt,  and  reverence,
and  sanctify,  and  ascribe  the  kingdom  to  Thy  name,  oh,  our
King  !  For  it  is  good  to  praise  Thee,  and  pleasure  to  sing
praises  unto  Thy  name,  for  from  everlasting  to  everlasting
Thou  art  God."

"  The  breath  of  all  that  lives  shall  praise  Thy  name,
Jehovah  our  God.  And  the  spirit  of  all  flesh  shall  continu-
ally glorify  and  exalt  Thy  memorial,  oh,  our  King !  For
from  everlasting  to  everlasting  Thou  art  God,  and  besides
Thee  we  have  no  King,  Redeemer,  or  Saviour,"  etc.*

In  this  manner  was  the  Paschal  Supper  celebrated  by  the
Jews  at  the  time  when  our  Lord  for  the  last  time  sat  down
to  it  with  His  disciples.  So  important  is  it  to  have  a  clear
understanding  of  all  that  passed  on  that  occasion,  that,  at
the  risk  of  some  repetition,  we  shall  now  attempt  to  piece

^  It  is  a  curious  circumstance  that  the  Mishnah  seems  to  contemplate  the  same
painful  case  of  dmnkenness  at  the  Paschal  Supper,  which,  as  we  know,  actually
occurred  in  the  church  at  Corinth,  that  so  closely  imitated  the  Jewish  practice.
The  Mishnah  does  not,  indeed,  speak  in  so  many  words  of  dnmkenness,  but  it  lays
down  this  rule  :  "Does  anyone  sleep  at  the  Passover  meal  and  wake  again,  he  may
not  eat  again  after  he  is  awaked."

2  Exceptionally  a  fifth  cup  was  drunk,  and  over  it  **  the  great  Hallel"  was  said,
comprising  Psalms  cxx.-cxxxviL


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  Lord's  Stepper.     211

together  the  notices  in  the  various  Gospels,  adding  to  them
again  those  explanations  which  have  just  been  given  in
detail.  At  the  outset  we  may  dismiss,  as  unworthy  of
serious  discussion,  the  theory,  either  that  our  Lord '  had
observed  the  Paschal  Supper  at  another  than  the  regular
time  for  it,  or  that  St.  John  meant  to  intimate  that  He
had  partaken  of  it  on  the  13th  instead  of  the  14th  of  Nisan.^
To  such  violent  hypotheses,  which  are  wholly  uncalled  for^
there  is  this  one  conclusive  answer,  that,  except  on  the
evening  of  the  14th  of  Nisan,  no  Paschal  lamb  could  have
been  offered  in  the  Temple,  and  therefore  no  Paschal  Supper
celebrated  in  Jerusalem.  But  abiding  by  the  simple  text  of
Scripture,  we  have  the  following  narrative  of  events  : — Early
on  the  forenoon  of  the  14th  of  Nisan,  the  Lord  Jesus  having
sent  Peter  and  John  before  Him  '*  to  prepare  the  Passover,"
"  in  the  evening  He  cometh  with  the  twelve  "  ^  to  the  "  guest-
chamber,"  the  'Marge  upper  room  furnished  "  ^  for  the  Supper,
although  He  seems  to  have  intended  ''after  Supper"  to  spend
the  night  outside  the  city.  Hence  Judas  and  the  band  from
the  chief  priests  do  not  seek  for  Him  where  He  had  eaten  the
Passover,  but  go  at  once  to  "  the  garden  into  which  He  had
entered,  and  His  disciples  ;  "  for  Judas  "  knew  the  place,"  *  and
it  was  one  to  which  "Jesus  ofttimes  resorted  with  His  dis-
ciples." "  When  the  hour  was  come  "  for  the  commbncement
of  the  Paschal  Supper,  Jesus  "  sat  down,  and  the  twelve
apostles  with  Him,"  all,  as  usual  at  the  feast,  "leaning,"^
John  on  "Jesus'  bosom,"  being  placed  next  before  Him,  and
Judas  apparently  next  behind,  while  Simon  Peter  faced  John,

1  For  the  evidence  that  the  *' Lord's  Supper  *'  took  place  on  the  Paschal  night,
see  the  Appendix.
•  Mark  xiv.  17.       ^  Luke  xxii.  1 1,  12.       *  John  xviii.  I,  2.       ^  John  xiii.  23


t


212        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

and  was  thus  able  to  *' beckon  unto  him"  when  he  wished
inquiry  to  be  made  of  the  Lord.     The  disciples  being  thus
ranged,  the  Lord  Jesus  *'  took  the  cup  and  gave  thanks,  and
said,  Take  this,  and  divide  it  among  yourselves."  ^  This  was
the  first  cup,  over  which  the  first   prayer  in  the  service  was
spoken.     Next,   as  in  duty  bound,  all  washed  their  hands,
only  that  the  Lord  here  also  gave  meaning  to  the  observ-
ance, when,  expanding  the  service  into   Christian  fellowship
over  His  broken  body.  He  "riseth  from  Supper"  ''and  began
to  wash  the  disciples'  feet."  ^     It  is  thus  we  explain  how  this
ministry,  though  calling  forth  Peter's  resistance  to  the  posi-
tion which  the  Master  took,  did  not  evoke  any  question  as  to
its  singularity.     As  the  service  proceeded,  the  Lord  mingled
teaching  for  the  present  with  the  customary  lessons  of  the
past ;  ^    for,    as   we    have   seen,    considerable    freedom    was
allowed,  provided  the  instruction,  proper  at  the  feast,  were
given.     The  first  part  of  the  "  Hallel  "  had  been  sung,  and  in
due  order  He  had  taken  the  "bread  of  poverty"  and  the
'*  bitter  herbs,"  commemorative  of  the  sorrow  and  the  bitter-
ness  of  Egypt,   when  "  He   was  troubled   in   spirit "   about
"  the  root  of  bitterness "  about  to  spring  up  among,  and  to
"trouble"  them,  by  which  "many  would  be  defiled."     The
general  concern  of  the  disciples  as  to  which  of  their  number
should  betray  Him,  found  expression  in  the  gesture  of  Peter.
His  friend  John  understood  its  meaning,  and  "  lying  back  on
Jesus'  breast,"  he  put  the  whispered  question,  to  which  the
Lord  replied  by  giving  "  the  sop  "  of  unleavened  bread  with
bitter  herbs,  "when  He  had  dipped  "  it,  to  Judas  Iscariot.

"And  after  the  sop  Satan  entered  into  him,"  and  he  "went
out  immediately."     It  was  an  unusual  time  to  leave  the  Pas-

*  Luke  xxii.  ly.  "  John  xiii.  4,  5.  ^  John  xiii.  12-20.


The  Paschal  Feast  and  the  Lord's  Supper.    213

chal  table,  for  with  "the  sop  dipped"  into  the  "Charoseth"
the  Paschal  Supper  itself  had  only  just  begun.  But  then  ''  some
of  them  thought" — perhaps  without  fully  considering  it  in
their  excitement — that  Judas,  who  "had  the  bag,"  and  on  whom,
therefore,  the  care  of  such  things  devolved,  had  only  gone  to
see  after  "those  things  that  they  had  need  of  against  the
feast,"  or  to  "give  something  to  the  poor" — applying  some  of
the  common  stock  of  money  in  helping  to  provide  "  peace-
offerings"  for  the  poor.  This  would  have  been  quite  in
accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  ordinance,  while  neither  sup-
position necessarily  involved  a  breach  of  the  law,  since  it  was
permitted  to  prepare  all  needful  provision  for  the  feast,  and  of
course  also  for  the  Sabbath,  which  in  this  instance  followed  it.
For,  as  we  have  seen,  the  festive  observance  of  the  isth  of
Nisan  differed  in  this  from  the  ordinary  Sabbath-law,  although
there  is  evidence  that  even  the  latter  was  at  that  time  by  no
means  so  strict  as  later  Jewish  tradition  has  made  it.  And
then  it  was,  after  the  regular  Paschal  meal,  that  the  Lord
instituted  His  own  Supper,  for  the  tirst  time  using  the  Aphu
komen  "  when  He  had  given  thanks  "  (after  meat),  to  symbolise
His  body,  and  the  third  cup,  or  "cup  of  blessing  which  we
bless  "^ — being  "the  cup  after  supper"^ — to  symbolise  His
blood.  "And  when  they  had  sung  an  hymn"^  "they  went
out  into  the  mount  of  Olives."*

Then  it  was  that  the  Lord's  great  heaviness  and  loneli-
ness came  upon  Him ;  when  all  around  seemed  to  give
way,  as  if  crushed  under  the  terrible  burden  about  to  be
lifted  ;  when  His  disciples  could  not  watch  with  Him  even
one  hour  ;  when  in  the  agony  of  His  soul  "  His  sweat  was  as
it  were  great  drops  of  blood,  falling  down  to  the  ground;*
*  I  Cor.  X.  16.        *  Luke  xxii.  20.       ^  Psalms  cxv.-cxviiL        *  Matt.  xxvi.  3a


214       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

and  when  He  "  prayed,  saying :  O  my  Father,  if  it  be  pos-
sible, let  this  cup  pass  from  Me  :  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,
but  as  Thou  wilt."  But  "  the  cup  which  the  Father "  had
given  Him,  He  drank  to  the  bitter  dregs;  and  "when  He
had  offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying
and  tears  unto  Him  that  was  able  to  save  Him  from  death,
and  was  heard  in  that  He  feared ;  though  He  were  a  Son,
yet  learned  He  obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffered  ;
and  being  made  perfect.  He  became  the  author  of  eternal
salvation  unto  all  them  that  obey  Him."^

Thus  the  "  Lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot,  who
verily  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  "*
— and,  indeed,  "slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world "^ —
was  selected,  ready,  willing,  and  waiting.  It  only  remained,
that  it  should  be  actually  offered  up  as  "  the  propitiation
for  our  sins :  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  whole
world."*


CHAPTER    XIII.

THE  FEAST  OF  UNLEAVENED  BREAD  AND  THE  DAY  OF
PENTECOST.

*•  And  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come,  they  were  all  with  one  acaord
in  one  place." — Acts  ii.  I.

THE  "feast  of  unleavened  bread,"  which  commenced  in
the  Paschal  night  itself  and  lasted  for  seven  days,
derived  its  name  from  the  Mazzoth,  or  unleavened  cakes,
which  were  the  only  bread  allowed  during  that  week.  This
is  called  in  Scripture  "  the  bread  of  affliction,"^  as  is  commonly
supposed,  because  its  insipid  and  disagreeable  taste  symbolised
the  hardship  and  affliction  of  Egypt.  But  this  explanation
must  be  erroneous.  It  would  convert  one  of  the  most  joyous
festivals  into  an  annual  season  of  mourning.  The  idea  intended
to  be  conveyed  by  the  Scriptural  term  is  quite  different.  For,
just  as  we  should  ever  remember  the  death  of  our  Saviour  in
connection  with  His  resurrection,  so  were  Israel  always  to
remember  their  bondage  in  connection  with  their  deliverance.
Besides,  the  bread  of  the  Paschal  night  was  not  that  of
affliction  because  it  was  unleavened ;  it  was  unleavened
because  it  had  been  that  of  affliction.  For  it  had  been
Israel's  "affliction,"  and  a  mark  of  their  bondage  and  sub-
jection to  the  Egyptians,  to  be  driven  forth  in  such  "  haste  "  *
as  not  even  to  have  time  for  leavening  their  bread.  Hence  also
*  Deut  xvi,  3.  2  Deut.  xvi.  3 ;  Ex.  xii.  33,  39.


2i6        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

the  prophet,  when  predicting  another  and  far  more  glorious
deliverance,  represents  Israel,  in  contrast  to  the  past,  as  too
holy  to  seek  enrichment  by  the  possessions,  and  as  too  secure
to  be  driven  forth  in  haste  by  the  fear  of  those  who  had  held
them  captives  :

**  Depart  ye,  depart  ye,  go  ye  out  from  thence, — touch  no  unclean  thing  ;
Go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her  ;  be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  Jehovah.
For  ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste, — nor  go  by  flight  :
For  Jehovah  will  go  before  you ;  and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  rereward."  ^

The  Passover,  therefore,  was  not  so  much  the  remem-
brance of  Israel's  bondage  as  .of  Israel's  deliverance  from
that  bondage,  and  the  bread  which  had  originally  been  that
of  affliction,  because  that  of  haste,  now  became,  as  it  were,
the  bread  of  a  new  state  of  existence.  None  of  Egypt's
leaven  was  to  pervade  it ;  nay,  all  the  old  leaven,  which  served
as  the  symbol  of  corruption  and  of  death,  was  to  be  wholly
banished  from  their  homes.  They  were  to  be  "  a  new  lump,'*
as  they  were  '*  unleavened."^  Thus  what  had  originally  been
the  necessity  of  one  day,  became  the  ordinance  of  a  feast,
bearing  the  sacred  number  of  seven  days.  As  the  cross
has  become  to  us  the  tree  of  life ;  as  death  hath  been
abolished  by  death,  and  captivity  been  led  captive  by  the
voluntary  servitude^  of  the  Lord  of  glory,  so  to  Israel  the
badge  of  former  affliction  became  the  symbol  of  a  new  and
joyous  life,  in  which  they  were  to  devote  themselves  and
all  that  they  had  unto  the  Lord.

The  same  truth  is  fully  symbolised  in  the  sacrifices  of
this  Feast,  and  especially  in  the  presentation  of  the  first
ripe  sheaf  on  the  second  day  of  the  Passover.  The  first
day  of  "unleavened  bread,"  or  the  15th  of  Nisan,  was  a
"holy  convocation,"  when  neither  servile  nor  needless  work
»  Isa.  Hi.  II,  12.  *  I  Cor.  v.  7,  ^  Psa.  xl.  6,  7,


Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  and  Day  of  Pentecost.    217

was  to  be  done,  that  only  being  allowed  which  was  necessary
for  the.  joyous  observance  of  the  festival.  After  the  regular
morning  sacrifice  the  public  offerings  were  brought.  These
consisted,  on  each  of  the  seven  days  of  the  festive  week,
of  two  young  bullocks,  one  ram,  and  seven  lambs  for  a  burnt-
offering,  with  their  appropriate  meat-offerings;  and  of  "one
goat  for  a  sin-offering,  to  make  an  atonement  for  you."  ^
After  these  public  sacrifices  (for  the  whole  congregation),  the
private  offerings  of  each  individual  were  brought,  commonly
on  the  first  day  of  the  Feast  (the  15  th  of  Nisan),  but  if  this
had  been  neglected,  on  any  of  the  other  days.  These  sacri-
fices were  a  burnt-offering,  of  the  value  of  at  least  one  meah
of  silver^  (=  \  denar,  or  about  2id.);  then,  the  15th  day
Chagigah^  (literally,  festivity),  of  the  value  of  at  least  two
meahs  of  silver  (=Sd.) ;  and,  lastly,  the  so-called  "sacrifices
of  joyousness,"*in  which  every  one  was  left  at  liberty  to  offer,
according  to  "the  blessing  which  the  Lord  had  given''  to
each.^  Both  the  Chagigah  and  the  "  offerings  of  joyousness"
were  "  peace-offerings."  They  required  imposition  of  hands,^
sprinkling  of  blood,  burning  of  the  inside  fat  and  kidneys
on  the  altar,  and  the  proper  setting  aside  of  what  went  to
the  priest,  viz.,  the  breast  as  a  wave-  and  the  right  shoulder
as  a  heave-offering;^  the  difference,  as  we  have  seen,  being,

1  Numb,  xxviii.  19-24.

•  In  this,  as  in  many  other  particulars,  the  teaching  of  Shammai  differed  from
that  of  Hillel.    We  have  followed  Hillel,  whose  authority  is  generally  recognised.

2  It  is  strange  that  the  differences  between  the  Chagigah  of  the  14th  and  that  of
the  15th  Nisan  should  have  been  so  entirely  overlooked  in  Kitto's  CycL  iii.  428,
They  are  well  pointed  out  in  Relandus'  Antiq.,  pp.  404,  405.  See  also  the  very  full
rtatements  of  Saalschiitz,  Mos,  Recht^  pp.  414,  415.

*  Deut.  xxvii.  7.  *  Deut.  xvi.  17.

®  On  this  subject  also  Shammai  and  Hillel  differed.  See  on  the  whole  Mishnak^
Chag.  i.  and  iL  '  Lev.  ill  1-5 ;  vii.  29-34.


5i8        The  Templcy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

that  the  wave-offering  belonged  originally  to  Jehovah,  who
gave  His  portion  to  the  priests,  while  the  heave-offering
came  to  them  directly  from  the  people.  The  rest  was  used
by  the  offerers  in  their  festive  meals  (but  only  during  two
days  and  one  night  from  the  time  of  sacrifice).  Tradition
allowed  the  poor,  who  might  have  many  to  share  at  their
board,  to  spend  even  less  than  one  meah  on  their  burnt-
offerings,  if  they  added  what  had  been  saved  to  their  peace-
offerings.  Things  devoted  to  God,  such  as  tithes,  firstlings,
etc.,  might  be  used  for  this  purpose,  and  it  was  even  lawful
for  priests  to  offer  what  had  come  to  them  as  priestly  dues.^
In  short,  it  was  not  to  be  a  heavy  yoke  of  bondage,  but  a
joyous  festival.  But  on  one  point  the  law  was  quite  explicit
— the  Chagigah  might  not  be  offered  by  any  person  who
had  contracted  Levitical  defilement.^  It  was  on  this  ground
that,  when  the  Jews  led  "Jesus  from  Caiaphas  unto  the  hall
of  judgment,"  they  themselves  went  not  into  the  judgment-
hall,  lest  they  should  be  defiled,  but  that  they  might  "  eat
the  Passover."^  And  this  brings  us  once  more  to  the  historj
of  the  last  real  Passover.

"It  was  early"  on  the  15th  day  of  Nisan  when  the  Lord
was  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  In  the  pre-
vious night  He  and  His  disciples  had  partaken  of  the  Paschal
Supper.  The  betrayer  alone  was  too  busy  with  his  plans  to
finish  the  meal.  He  had,  so  to  speak,  separated  from  the
fellowship  of  Israel  before  he  excommunicated  himself  from
that  of  Christ.  While  the  Paschal  services  in  the  "  guest-
chamber"  were  prolonged  by  the  teaching  and  the  interces-
sion of  the  Master,  and  when  the  concluding  rites  of  that

*  Mishnakf  Chag,  i.  3,  4.  *  Fes,  vi.  3.

*  John  xviii.  28.


Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  and  Day  of  Pentecost.    219

night  merged  in  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  Judas
was  completing,  with  the  chief  priests  and  elders,  the  betrayal
of  Jesus,  and  received  the  '*  reward  of  iniquity."  ^  Either  the
impetuosity  of  the  traitor,  or,  more  probably,  the  thought
that  such  an  opportunity  might  never  come  to  them  again,
decided  the  elders,  who,  till  then,  had  intended  to  delay  the
capture  of  Jesus  till  after  the  Feast,  for  "  fear  of  the  multi-
tude." It  was  necessary  to  put  aside,  not  only  considerations
of  truth  and  of  conscience,  but  to  violate  almost  every  fun-
damental principle  of  their  own  judicial  administration.  In
such  a  cause,  however,  the  end  would  sanctify  any  means.

Some  of  their  number  hastily  gathered  the  Temple  guard
under  its  captains.  A  detachment  of  Roman  soldiers  under
an  officer^  would  readily  be  granted  from  the  neighbouring
fortress,  Antonia,  when  the  avowed  object  was  to  secure  a
dangerous  leader  of  rebellion  and  to  prevent  the  possibility
of  a  popular  tumult  in  his  favour.  A  number  of  trusty
fanatics  from  the  populace  accompanied  "  the  band.'*  They
were  all  armed  with  clubs  and  swords,  "  as  against  a  mur-
derer ; "  and  though  the  dazzling  light  of  a  full  moon  shone
on  the  scene,  they  carried  torches  and  lamps,  in  case  He  or
His  followers  should  hide  in  the  recesses  of  the  garden  or
escape  observation.  But  far  other  than  they  had  expected
awaited  them  in  "the  garden."  He  whom  they  had  come
to  take  prisoner  by  violent  means  first  overcame,  and  then
willingly  surrendered  to  them,  only  stipulating  for  the  free-

*  Acts  i.  18.

2  We  derive  our  account  from  all  the  four  Gospels.  The  langiiage  of  St.  John
(xviii.  3,  12)  leaves  no  doubt  that  a  detachment  of  Roman  soldiers  accompanied
such  of  the  elders  and  priests  as  went  out  with  the  Temple  guard  to  take  Jesus.
There  was  no  need  to  apply  for  Pilate's  permission  (as  Lange  supposes)  before
securing  the  aid  of  the  soldiers.


220       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

dom  of  His  followers.  They  led  Him  back  into  the  city,  to
the  Palace  of  the  High  Priest,  on  the  slope  of  Mount  Zion,
almost  opposite  to  the  Temple.  What  passed  there  need  not
be  further  described,  except  to  say,  that,  in  their  treatment  of
Jesus,  the  Sanhedrim  violated  not  only  the  law  of  God,  but
grossly  outraged  every  ordinance  of  their  own  traditions.^
Possibly  the  consciousness  of  this,  almost  as  much  as  political
motives,  may  have  influenced  them  in  handing  over  the
matter  to  Pilate.  The  mere  fact  that  they  possessed  not  the
power  of  capital  punishment  would  scarcely  have  restrained
them  from  killing  Jesus,  as  they  afterwards  stoned  Stephen,
and  would  have  murdered  Paul  but  for  the  intervention  of
the  Roman  garrison  from  Fort  Antonia.  On  the  other  hand,
if  it  was,  at  the  same  time,  their  object  to  secure  a  public  con-
demnation and  execution,  and  to  awaken  the  susceptibilities  of
the  civil  power  against  the  movement  which  Christ  had  initiated,
it  was  necessary  to  carry  the  case  to  Pilate.  And  so  in  that
grey  morning  light  of  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread  the
saddest  and  strangest  scene  in  Jewish  history  was  enacted.
The  chief  priests  and  elders,  and  the  most  fanatical  of  the
people  were  gathered  in  Fort  Antonia.  From  where  they
stood  outside  the  Prsetorium  they  would,  in  all  probability,
have  a  full  view  of  the  Temple  buildings,  just  below  the
rocky  fort ;  they  could  see  the  morning  sacrifice  off*ered,  and
the  column  of  sacrificial  smoke  and  of  incense  rise  from  the
great  altar  towards  heaven.  At  any  rate,  even  if  they  had
not  seen  the  multitude  that  thronged  the  sacred  buildings,
they  could  hear  the  Levites'  song  and  the  blasts  of  the
priests'  trumpets.      And  now  the  ordinary  morning  service

»  We  cannot  here  enter  on  the  evidence;  the  fact  is  generally  admitted,  even  by
Jewish  writers.


Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  and  Day  of  Pentecost.    221

was  over,  and  the  festive  sacrifices  were  offered.  It  only
remained  to  bring  the  private  burnt-offerings,  and  to  sacrifice
the  Chagigah/  which  they  must  offer  undefiled,  if  they  were
to  bring  it  at  all,  or  to  share  in  the  festive  meal  that  would
afterwards  ensue.  And  so  the  strangest  contradiction  was
enacted.  They  who  had  not  hesitated  to  break  every  law
of  God's  and  of  their  own  making,  would  not  enter  the
Praetorium,  lest  they  should  be  defiled  and  prevented  from
the  Chagigah  !  Surely,  the  logic  of  inconsistency  could  go
no  further  in  punctiliously  observing  the  letter  and  violating
the  spirit  of  the  law.

That  same  afternoon  of  the  first  Passover  day,  "  when  the
sixth  hour  was  come,  there  was  darkness  over  the  whole  land
until  the  ninth  hour.  And  at  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with
a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachthani  ?  which
is,  being  interpreted.  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  Thou  for-
saken Me  .^  .  .  .  .  And  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and
gave  up  the  ghost.  And  the  veil  of  the  Temple  was  rent  in
twain,  from  the  top  to  the  bottom."  This,  just  about  the
time  when  the  evening  sacrifice  had  been  offered,  so  that
the  incensing  priest  standing  in  the  Holy  Place  must  have
witnessed  the  awful  sight.^

A  little  later  on  in  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  just  as  it  was
growing  dark,  a  noisy  throng  followed  delegates  from  the  San-
hedrim outside  the  city  and  across  the  brook  Kedron.    It  was

*  The  evidence  that  the  expression  in  John  xviii.  28,  **They  went  not  into  the
judgment -hall  ....  that  they  might  eat  the  Passover,"  refers  not  to  the  Paschal
lamb,  but  to  the  Chagigah,  is  exceedingly  strong,  in  fact,  such  as  to  have  even
convinced  an  emment  but  impartial  Jewish  writer  (Saalschlitz,  Mos.  Recht,  p.  414).
It  does  seem  strange  that  it  should  be  either  unknown  to,  or  ignored  by,  '*  Chris-
tian "  writers.

*  This  would  not  necessarily  disclose  a  view  of  the  Most  Holy  Place  if,  as  the
Rabbis  assert,  there  were  twc  veils  between  the  Holy  and  the  Most  Holy  Place.


22  2      The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

a  very  different  procession,  and  for  a  very  different  purpose,
from  the  small  band  of  mourners  which,  just  about  the  same
time,  carried  the  body  of  the  dead  Saviour  from  the  cross
to  the  rock-hewn  tomb  wherein  no  man  had  yet  been  laid.
While  the  one  turned  into  "  the  garden,"^  perhaps  to  one  side,
the   other  emerged,  amidst  loud  demonstrations,    in  a  field
across  Kedron,  which  had  been  marked  out  for  the  purpose.
They  were  to  be  engaged  in  a  service    most  important   to
them.     It  was  probably  to  this  circumstance  that  Joseph  of
Arimathea  owed  their  non-interference  with  his  request  for
the  body  of  Jesus,  and  Nicodemus  and  the  women,  that  they
could  go  undisturbed  about   the   last   sad  offices  of  loving
mourners.     The  law  had  it,  *'Ye  shall  bring  a  sheaf  [liter-
ally  the   omer]  of  the  firstfruits  of  your   harvest   unto  the
priest  ;  and  he  shall  wave  the  omer  before  Jehovah,  to  be
accepted  for  you  :  on  the  morrow  after  the  Sabbath  the  priest
shall  wave  it."  ^     This  Passover-sheaf,  or  rather  omer,  was  to
be  accompanied  by  a  burnt-offering  of  a  ''  he  lamb,  without
blemish,  of  the  first  year,"  with  its  appropriate  meat-  and
drink-offering,  and  after  it  had  been  brought,  but   not  till
then,  fresh  barley  might  be  used  and  sold  in  the  land.     Now,
this  Passover-sheaf  was  reaped  in  public  the  evening  before
it  was  offered,  and  it  was  to  witness  this  ceremony  that  the
crowd  gathered  around  '*  the  elders,"  who  took  care  that  all
was  done  according  to  traditionary  ordinance.

The  expression,  "  the  morrow  after  the  Sabbath,"^  has
sometimes  been  misunderstood  as  implying  that  the  presenta-
tion of  the  so-called  "  first  sheaf  "  was  to  be  always  made  on
the  day  following  the  weekly  Sabbath  of  the  Passover-week.
This  view,  adopted  by  the  "  Boethusians"  and  the  Sadducees

*  John  XX.  15.  «   Lev.  xxiii.  10,  il.  •  Lev.  xxiii.  ii.


Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  and  Day  of  Pentecost,    223

in  the  time  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Karaite  Jews  and  certain
modern  interpreters,  rests  on  a  misinterpretation  of  the  word
"  Sabbath/'^  As  in  analogous  allusions  to  other  feasts  in  the
same  chapter,  it  means  not  the  weekly  Sabbath,  but  the  day
of  the  festival.  The  testimony  of  Josephus,^  of  Philo,^  and
of  Jewish  tradition,  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that  in  this
instance  we  are  to  understand  by  the  "  Sabbath  "  the  15th  of
Nisan,  on  whatever  day  of  the  week  it  giight  fall.  Already,
on  the  14th  of  Nisan,  the  spot  whence  the  first  sheaf  was  to
be  reaped  had  been  marked  out  by  delegates  from  the  San-
hedrim, by  tying  together  in  bundles,  while  still  standing,
the  barley  that  was  to  be  cut  down.  Though,  for  obvious
reasons,  it  was  customary  to  choose  for  this  purpose  the  shel-
tered Ashes-valley  across  Kedron,  there  was  no  restriction  on
that  point,  provided  the  barley  had  grown  in  an  ordinary
field — of  course  in  Palestine  itself— and  not  in  garden  or
orchard  land,  and  that  the  soil  had  not  been  manured  nor
yet  artificially  watered.*  When  the  time  for  cutting  the  sheaf
had  arrived,  that  is,  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  of  Nisan
(even  though  it  were  a  Sabbath^),  just  as  the  sun  went  down,
three  men,  each  with  a  sickle  and  basket,  formally  set  to
work.  But  in  order  clearly  to  bring  out  all  that  was  dis-
tinctive in  the  ceremony,  they  first  asked  of  the  bystanders
three  times  each  of  these  questions:  "Has  the  sun  gone
down.?"  "With  this  sickle.?"  "Into  this  basket.?"  "On
this  Sabbath  (or  first  Passover-day)  ?" — and,  lastly,  "Shall  I

^  Lev.  xxiii.  24,  32,  39.  *  Antiq.  iii.  10,  5,  6.  ^  Qp^  jj   294.

*  Mishnah,  Menach,  viii.  i,  2.  The  field  was  to  be  ploughed  in  the  autumn,
and  sowed  seventy  days  before  the  Passover.

^  There  was  a  controversy  on  this  point  between  the  Pharisees  and  the  Saddu-
cees.  The  article  in  Kitto's  Cya,  erroneously  names  the  afternoon  of  the  i6tli  of
Nisan  as  mat  on  which  the  sheaf  was  cut.  It  was  really  done  after  sunset  on  the
15th,  which  was  the  beginning  of  the  i6th  of  Nisan.


224       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

reap  ?"  Having  each  time  been  answered  in  the  affirmative,
they  cut  down  barley  to  the  amount  of  one  ephah,  or  ten
omers,  or  three  seahs,  which  is  equal  to  about  three  pecks  and
three  pints  of  our  English  measure.  The  ears  were  brought
into  the  Court  of  the  Temple,  and  thrashed  out  with  canes  or
stalks,  so  as  not  to  injure  the  corn  ;  then  **  parched  "  on  a  pan
perforated  with  holes,  so  that  each  grain  might  be  touched  by
the  fire,  and  finally  exposed  to  the  wind.  The  corn  thus  pre-
pared was  ground  in  a  barley-mill,  which  left  the  hulls  whole.
According  to  some,  the  flour  was  always  successively  passed
through  thirteen  sieves,  each  closer  than  the  other.  The
statement  of  a  rival  authority,  however,  seems  more  rational
— that  it  was  only  done  till  the  flour  was  sufficiently  fine,^
which  was  ascertained  by  one  of  the  "  Gizbarim  *'  (treasurers)
plunging  his  hands  into  it,  the  sifting  process  being  continued
so  long  as  any  of  the  flour  adhered  to  the  hands.^  Though  one
ephah,  or  ten  omers,  of  barley  was  cut  down,  only  one  omer  of
flour,  or  about  5*1  pints  of  our  measure,  was  offered  in  the
Temple  on  the  second  Paschal,  or  i6th  day  of  Nisan.  The  rest
of  the  flour  might  be  redeemed,  and  used  for  any  purpose.
The  omer  of  flour  was  mixed  with  a  **  log,"  or  very  nearly
three-fourths  of  a  pint  of  oil,  and  a  handful  ^  of  frankincense
put  upon  it,  then  waved  before  the  Lord,  and  a  handful  taken
out  and  burned  on  the  altar.  The  remainder  belonged  to  the
priest.  This  was  what  is  popularly,  though  not  very  correctly,
called  "  the  presentation  of  the  first  or  wave-sheaf"  on  the
second  day  of  the  Passover- feast,  or  the  1 6th  of  Nisan.

Thus  far  the  two  first  days.     The  last  day  of  the  Passover,
as  the  first,  was  a  **  holy  convocation,"  and  observed  like  a

*  Men,  vi.  6,  7.  *  Men,  viii.  2.

^  The  term  is  difficult  to  define.    The  Mishnah  {Men,  ii.  2)  says,  **  He  stretcheth
the  tingers  over  the  flat  of  the  hand,"     I  suppose,  bending  them  inwards.


Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  and  Day  of  Pentecost,    225

Sabbath.  The  intervening  days  were  "  minor  festivals,"  or
Moed  Katon.  The  Mishnah  (Tract.  Moed  Katori)  lays  down
precise  rules  as  to  the  kind  of  work  allowed  on  such  days.
As  a  general  principle,  all  that  was  necessary  either  for  the
public  interest  or  to  prevent  private  loss  was  allowed  ;  but  no
new  work  of  any  kind  for  private  or  public  purposes  might
be  begun.  Thus  you  might  irrigate  dry  soil,  or  repair  works
for  irrigation,  but  not  make  new  ones,  nor  dig  canals,  etc.^
It  only  remains  to  add,  that  any  one  prevented  by  Levitical
defilement,  disability,  or  distance  from  keeping  the  regular
Passover,  might  obsen/e  what  was  called  "the  second,"  or
**  the  little  Passover,"  exactly  a  month  later.^  The  Mishzak
has  it^  that  the  second  differed  from  the  first  Passover  in  this
— that  leaven  might  be  kept  in  the  house  along  with  the  un-
leavened bread,  that  the  Hallel  was  not  sung  at  the  Paschal
Supper,  and  that  no  Chagigah  was  offered.

The  '^  feast  of  unleavened  bread  "  may  be  said  not  to  have
quite  passed  till  fifty  days  after  its  commencement,  when  it
merged  in  that  of  Pentecost,  or  ''  of  Weeks."  According  to
unanimous  Jewish  tradition,  which  was  universally  received  at
the  time  of  Christ,  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  the  anniversary  of
the  giving  of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai,  which  the  Feast  of  Weeks
was  intended  to  commemorate.  Thus,  as  the  dedication  of  the
harvest,  commencing  with  the  presentation  of  the  first  omer  on
the  Passover,  was  completed  in  the  thank-offering  of  the  two
wave-loaves  at  Pentecost,  so  the  memorial  of  Israel's  deliverance

*  The  assertion  (Kitto's  Cyd.  iii.  p.  429),  that  on  these  days  **  the  iessei
*  Hallel 'was  recited,  and  not  the  great  *  Hallel,'"  is  incorrect.  Indeed,  it  is
inconsistent  with  the  account  of  the  '*  Hallel,"  given  by  the  same  writer  in  another
part  of  the  Cyd,  The  great  '*  Hallel "  was  never  on  ordinary  occasions  recited
in  the  Temple  at  all,  and  "the  lesser  (?)  Hallel "  certainly  not  during  '^Mr
Katon"  of  the  Passover  week.  *  Numb,  ix,  9-12,  ^  Fes.  ix.

Q


226        The   Temple,  its  Mi/iisfry  and  Service Sr>

appropriately  terminated  in  that  of  the  giving  of  the  law — just
as,  making  the  highest  application  of  it,  the  Passover  sacrifice
of  the  Lord  Jesus  may  be  said  to  have  been  completed  in  the
outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.^  Jewish
tradition  has  it,  that  on  the  2nd  of  the  third  month,  or  Sivan,
Moses  had  ascended  the  Mount,^  that  he  communicated  with
the  people  on  the  3rd,^  reascended  the  Mount  on  the  4th,^  and
that  then  the  people  sanctified  themselves  on  the  4th,  5th,  and
6th  of  Sivan,  on  which  latter  day  the  ten  commandments  were
actually  given  them.^  Accordingly  the  days  before  Pentecost
were  always  reckoned  as  the  first,  second,  third,  etc.,  since  the
presentation  of  the  omer.  Thus  Maimonides  beautifully
observes  :  "  Just  as  one  who  is  expecting  the  most  faithful  of
his  friends  is  wont  to  count  the  days  and  hours  to  his  arrival,
so  we  also  count  from  the  omer  of  the  day  of  our  Exodus
from  Egypt  to  that  of  the  giving  of  the  law,  which  was  the
object  of  our  Exodus,  as  it  is  said  :  *  I  bare  you  on  eagle's
wings,  and  brought  you  unto  myself/  And  because  this  great
manifestation  did  not  last  more  than  one  day,  therefore  we
annually  commemorate  it  only  one  day."^

Full  seven  weeks  after  the  Paschal  day,  counting  from  the
presentation  of  the  omer  on  the  i6th  of  Nisan,  or  exactly
on  the  fiftieth  day,^  was  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  or  Pentecost,  "  a
holy  convocation,''  in  which  **  no  servile  work  "  was  to  be  done,^
when  "all  males"  were  to  "appear  before  Jehovah"  in  His
sanctuary,^  and  the  appointed  sacrifices  and  offerings  to  be

*  Acts  il  *  Ex.  xix.  1-3.  ^  Ex.  xix.  7.  *  Ex.  xix.  8.

^  Ex.  xix.  10-16.  0\\  I  to  the  peculiarity  of  the  Jewish  calendar,  Pentecost
did  not  always  take  place  exactly  on  the  6th  Sivan.  Care  was  taken  that  it  shouLl
not  occur  on  a  Tuesday,  Thursday,  or  Saturday.     (Reland.,  p.  430.)

^  More  Neb,  quoted  in  Kitto's  Cycl.  iii.  p.  468.  '''  Lev.  xxiii.  15,  1 5

•  Lev.  xxiii.  21  ;  Numb,  xxviii.  26.  •  Ex.  xxiii.  14-17.


Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  and  Day  of  Pentecost.    227

brought.  The  names,  "  Feast  of  Weeks  "^  and  '*  Feast  of  the
Fiftieth  Day,"  or  "  Day  of  Pentecost,"^  bear  reference  to  this
interval  from  the  Passover.  Its  character  is  expressed  by  the
terms  *'  feast  of  harvest  *'^  and  "  day  of  firstfruits,"*  while  Jewish
tradition  designates  it  as  *'  Chag  ha  Azereth,'*  or  simply
"  Azereth  "  (the  "  feast  of  the  conclusion,"  or  simply  *'  con-
clusion "),  and  the  "  Season  of  the  giving  of  our  Law."

The  festive  sacrifices  for  the  day  of  Pentecost  were,  accord-
ing to  Numb,  xxviii.  26-31,  "two  young  bullocks,  one  ram,
and  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  "  for  a  burnt-offering,  along
with  their  appropriate  meat-offerings  ;  and  "  one  kid  of  the
goats  "  for  a  sin-offering — all  these,  of  course,  irrespective  of
the  usual  morning  sacrifice.  But  what  gave  to  the  feast  its
distinctive  peculiarity  was  the  presentation  of  the  two  loaves,
and  the  sacrifices  which  accompanied  them.  Though  the
attendance  of  worshippers  at  the  Temple  may  not  have  been
so  large  as  at  the  Passover,  yet  tens  of  thousands  crowded  to
it.^  From  the  narrative  in  Acts  ii.  we  also  infer  that  perhaps,
more  than  at  any  of  the  other  great  festivals,  Jews  from  distant
countries  came  to  Jerusalem,  possibly  from  the  greater  facili-
ties for  travelling  which  the  season  afforded.  On  the  day
before  Pentecost  the  pilgrim  bands  entered  the  Holy  City,
which  just  then  lay  in  the  full  glory  of  early  summer.  Most
of  the  harvest  all  over  the  country  had  already  been  reaped,®
and  a  period  of  rest  and  enjoyment  seemed  before  them.  As
the  stars  shone  out  in  the  deep  blue  sky  with  the  brilliancy
peculiar  to  an  eastern  clime,  the  blasts  of  the  priests'  trumpets,

^  Ex.  xxxiv.  22;  Deut.  xvi.  lo,  i6;  2  Chron.  viii.  13.

•  Jos.  Jrd),   Wars,  ii.  3,  I  ;  Acts  ii.  I  ;  xx.  16  ;  i  Cor.  xvi.  8.

*  Ex.  xxiii.  16.       *  Numb,  xxviii.  26.        ^  Jos.  Antiq.  xiv.  13,  4;  xvii.  10,  2.
^  The  completion  of  the  wheat  harvest  throughout  the  land  is  computed  by  the

Rabbis  at  about  a  month  later.     See  Relandus,   Antiq.,  p.  428,


228        The  Te77tple,  its  Minis tiy  and  Services.

announcing  the  commencement  of  the  feast,  sounded  from  the
Temple  mount  through  the  delicious  stillness  of  the  summer
night.  Already  in  the  first  watch  the  great  altar  was  cleansed,
and  immediately  after  midnight  the  Temple  gates  were  thrown
open.  For  before  the  morning  sacrifice  all  burnt-  and  peace-
offerings  which  the  people  proposed  to  bring  at  the  feast
had  to  be  examined  by  the  officiating  priesthood.  Great  as
their  number  was,  it  must  have  been  a  busy  time,  till  the
announcement  that  the  morning  glow  extended  to  Hebron
put  an  end  to  all  such  preparations,  by  giving  the  signal  for
the  regular  morning  sacrifice.  After  that  the  festive  offerings
prescribed  in  Numb,  xxviii.  26-30  were  brought — first,  the
sin-offering,  with  proper  imposition  of  hands,  confession  of
sin,  and  sprinkling  of  blood;  and  similarly  the  burnt-offerings,
with  their  meat-off*erings.  The  Levites  were  now  chanting  the
**  Hallel "  to  the  accompanying  music  of  a  single  flute,  which
began  and  ended  the  song,  so  as  to  give  it  a  sort  of  soft
sweetness.  The  round,  ringing  treble  of  selected  voices
from  the  children  of  Levites,  who  stood  below  their  fathers,
gave  richness  and  melody  to  the  hymn,  while  the  people
either  repeated  or  responded,  as  on  the  evening  of  the
Passover  sacrifice.  Then  came  the  peculiar  offering  of  the
day — that  of  the  two  wave-loaves,  with  their  accompanying
sacrifices.  These  consisted  of  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year,
without  blemish,  one  young  bullock,  and  two  rams  for  a  burnt-
offering,  with  their  appropriate  meat-offerings  ;  and  then  '*  one
kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering,  and  two  lambs  of  the  first
year  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace-ofiferings."  ^     As  the  omer  for  the

^  Lev.  xxiii.  19.  This  offering,  accompanying  the  wave-loaves,  has  by  some
been  confounded  with  the  festive  sacrifices  of  the  day,  as  enumerated  in  Numh.
xxviii.  27.     But  the  two  are  manifestly  quite  distinct.


Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  and  Day  of  Pentecost.    229

i6th  of  Nisan  was  of  barley,  being  the  first  ripe  corn  in  the
land,  so  the  **  two  wave-loaves "  were  prepared  from  wheat
grown  in  the  best  district  of  the  country — under  conditions
similar  to  those  already  noticed  about  the  Passover-sheaf.
Similarly,  three  seahs,  or  about  three  pecks  and  three  pints  of
wheat,  were  cut  down,  brought  to  the  Temple,  thrashed  like
other  meat-offerings,  ground,  and  passed  through  twelve
sieves/  From  the  flour  thus  obtained  two  omers  (or  double
the  quantity  of  that  at  the  Passover)  were  used  for  *'  the  two
loaves ;  '*  the  rest  might  be  redeemed  and  used  for  any
purpose.  Care  was  taken  that  the  flour  for  each  loaf  should
be  taken  separately  from  one  and  a  half  seah,  that  it  should
be  separately  kneaded  with  lukewarm  water  (like  all  thank-
offerings),  and  separately  baked — the  latter  in  the  Temple
itself  The  loaves  were  made  the  evening  preceding  the
festival ;  or,  if  that  fell  on  the  Sabbath,  two  evenings  before.
In  shape  they  were  long  and  flat,  and  turned  up,  either  at  the
edges  or  at  the  corners.  According  to  the  Mishnahy  each
loaf  was  four  hand-breadths  wide,  seven  long,  and  four  fingers
high,  and,  as  it  contained  one  omer  of  flour  (5*1  pints,  or
rather  less  than  four  pounds'  weight),  the  dough  would  weigh
about  five  pounds  and  three-quarters,  yielding,  say,  five
pounds  and  a  quarter  of  bread,  or  ten  and  a  half  for  the  two
**  wave-loaves."  ^

Contrary  to  the  common  rule  of  the  Sanctuary,  these  loaves
were  leavened,  which,   as  the  Mishnah  informs  us,^  was  the

*  In  the  case  of  the  first  omer  it  had  been  thirteen  sieves ;  but  both  specifications
may  be  regarded  as  Rabbinical  fancifulness.

«  These  numbers  are  sufiBciently  accurate  for  general  computation.  By  actual
experiment  I  find  that  a  pint  of  flour  weighs  about  three-quarters  of  a  pound  and
two  ounces,  and  that  3  J  lbs.  of  flour,  with  half  a  teacup  of  barm  and  an  ounce  of
salt,  yield  5I  pounds  of  dough  and  5  J  lbs.  of  bread.  '  Men,  v.  I.


230       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

case  in  all  thank-offerings.  The  common  explanation — that
the  wave-loaves  were  leavened  because  they  represented  the
ordinary  food  of  the  people — only  partially  accounts  for  this.
No  doubt  these  wave-loaves  expressed  the  Old  Testament
acknowledgment  of  the  truth  which  our  Lord  embodied  in  the
prayer,  "Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread."  But  this  is
not  all.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  these  two  loaves,  with
the  two  lambs  that  formed  part  of  the  same  wave-offering,
were  the  only  public  peace-  and  thank-offerings  of  Israel  ;  that
they  were  accompanied  by  burnt-  and  sin-offerings  ;  and  that,
unlike  ordinary  peace-offerings,  they  were  considered  as  "  most
holy."  Hence  they  were  leavened,  because  Israel's  public
thank-offerings,  even  the  most  holy,  are  leavened  by  imper-
fectness  and  sin,  and  they  need  a  sin-offering.  This  idea  of  a
public  thank-offering  was  further  borne  out  by  all  the  services
of  the  day.  First,  the  two  lambs  were  "  waved  "  while  yet  alive  ;
that  is,  before  being  made  ready  for  use.  Then,  after  their
sacrifice,  the  breast  and  shoulder,  or  principal  parts  of  each,
were  laid  beside  the  two  loaves,  and  "  waved "  (generally
towards  the  east)  forwards  and  backwards,  and  up  and  down.^
After  burning  the  fat,  the  flesh  belonged,  not  to  the  offerers,
but  to  the  priests.  As  in  the  case  of  the  most  holy  sacrifices,
the  sacrificial  meal  was  to  take  place  within  the  Temple  itself,
nor  was  any  part  of  it  to  be  kept  beyond  midnight.  One  of  the
wave-loaves  and  of  the  lambs  went  to  the  high-priest ;  the
other  belonged  to  all  the  officiating  priesthood.  Lastly,  after
the  ceremony  of  the  wave-loaves,  the  people  brought  their  own
freewill-offerings,  each  as  the  Lord  had  prospered  him — the

^  The  Rabbinical  statement  is,  that  the  whole  offering  was  to  be  waved  together
by  a  priest ;  but  that  if  each  loaf,  with  one  breast  and  shoulder  of  lamb,  was  waved
separately,  it  was  valid.  From  the  weight  of  the  mass,  this  must  have  been  the
common  practice.


Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  and  Day  of  Pentecost.    231

afternoon  and  evening  being  spent  in  the  festive  meal,  to
which  the  stranger,  the  poor,  and  the  Levite  were  bidden  as
the  Lord's  welcome  guests.  On  account  of  the  number  of
such  sacrifices,  the  Feast  of  Weeks  was  generally  protracted
for  the  greater  part  of  a  week  ;  and  this  the  more  readily  that
the  offering  of  first-fruits  also  began  at  this  time.  Lastly,  as
the  bringing  of  the  omer  at  the  Passover  marked  the  period
when  new  corn  might  be  used  in  the  land,  so  the  presentation
of  the  wave-loaves  that  when  new  flour  might  be  brought  for
meat-offerings  in  the  Sanctuary.

If  Jewish  tradition  connected  the  "  feast  of  first-fruits  *'  with
the  *'  Mount  that  might  be  touched,"  and  the  '*  voice  of  words
which  they  that  heard  entreated  that  the  word  should  not  be
spoken  to  them  any  more,"  we  have  in  this  respect  also  *'come
unto  Mount  Zion,"  and  to  the  better  things  of  the  New
Covenant.  To  us  the  Day  of  Pentecost  is,  indeed,  the  "  feast
of  first-fruits,"  and  that  of  the  giving  of  the  better  law,  ''written
not  in  tables  of  stone,  but  on  the  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart,'*
^*  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God."  For,  as  the  worshippers
were  in  the  Temple,  probably  just  as  they  were  offering  the
wave-lambs  and  the  wave-bread,  the  multitude  heard  that
''sound  from  heaven,  as  of  a  mighty  rushing  wind,"  which
drew  them  to  the  house  where  the  apostles  were  gathered,
there  to  hear  "  every  man  in  his  own  language  "  "  the  wonder-
ful works  of  God."  And  on  that' Pentecost  day,  from  the
harvest  of  first-fruits,  not  less  than  three  thousand  souls  added
to  the  Church  were  presented  as  a  wave-offering  to  the  Lord.
The  cloven  tongues  of  fire  and  the  apostolic  gifts  of  that  day
of  first-fruits  have,  indeed,  long  since  disappeared.  But  the
mighty  rushing  sound  of  the  Presence  and  Power  of  the  Holy
Ghost  has  gone  forth  into  all  the  world.


CHAPTER  XIV.

THE  FEAST  OF  TABERNACLES.

*'  In  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of  the  feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried,  saying,  If  any
man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me,  and  drink." — John  vii.  37.

THE  most  joyous  of  all  festive  seasons  in  Israel  was  that
of  the  "  Feast  of  Tabernacles."  It  fell  on  a  time  of
year  when  the  hearts  of  the  people  would  naturally  be  full  of
thankfulness,  gladness,  and  expectancy.  All  the  crops  had
been  long  stored  ;  and  now  all  fruits  were  also  gathered,  the
vintage  past,  and  the  land  only  awaited  the  softening  and
refreshment  of  the  "  latter  rain,"  to  prepare  it  for  a  new  crop.
It  was  appropriate  that,  when  the  commencement  of  the  har-
vest had  been  consecrated  by  offering  the  first  ripe  sheaf  of
barley,  and  the  full  ingathering  of  the  corn  by  the  two  wave-
loaves,  there  should  now  be  a  harvest  feast  of  thankfulness  and
of  gladness  unto  the  Lord.  But  that  was  not  all.  As  they
looked  around  on  the  goodly  land,  the  fruits  of  which  had  just
enriched  them,  they  must  have  remembered  that  by  miracu-
lous interposition  the  Lord  their  God  had  brought  them  to
this  land  and  given  it  them,  and  that  He  ever  claimed  it  as
peculiarly  His  own.  For  the  land  was  strictly  connected
with  the  history  of  the  people  ;  and  both  the  land  and  the
history  were  linked  with  the  mission  of  Israel.     If  the  begin-


The  Feast  of  Tabei^nacles.  233

ningof  the  harvest  had  pointed  back  to  the  birth  of  Israel  in
their  Exodus  from  Egypt,  and  forward  to  the  true  Passover-
sacrifice  in  the  future ;  if  the  corn-harvest  was  connected  with
the  giving  of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai  in  the  past,  and  the  out-
pouring of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost ;  the
harvest-thanksgiving  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  reminded
Israel,  on  the  one  hand,  of  their  dwelling  in  booths  in  the
wilderness,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  pointed  to  the  final
Jiarvest  when  Israel's  mission  should  be  completed,  and  all
nations  gathered  unto  the  Lord.  Thus  the  first  of  the  three
great  annual  feasts  spoke,  in  the  presentation  of  the  first  sheaf,
of  the  founding  of  the  Church  ;  the  second  of  its  harvesting,
when  the  Church  in  its  present  state  should  be  presented  as
two  leavened  wave-loaves  ;  while  the  third  pointed  forward  to
the  full  harvest  in  the  end,  when  ''in  this  mountain  shall  the

Lord  of  Hosts  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat  things

And  He  will  destroy  in  this  mountain  the  face  of  the  covering
cast  over  all  people,  and  the  veil  that  is  spread  over  all  nations.
He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory  ;  and  the  Lord  God  will
wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  faces  ;  and  the  rebuke  of  His
people  (Israel)  shall  He  take  away  from  all  the  earth." ^

That  these  are  not  ideal  cornparisons,  but  the  very  design  of
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  appears  not  only  from  the  language
of  the  prophets  and  the  pecuhar  services  of  the  feast,  but  also
from  its  position  in  the  Calendar,  and  even  from  the  names  by
which  it  is  designated  in  Scripture.  Thus  in  its  reference  to
the  harvest  it  is  called  ''the  feast  of  ingathering  ;"2  in  that  to
the  history  of  Israel  in  the  past,  "  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  ;"^

*  Isa.  XXV.  6-8 ;  comp.  Rev.  xxi.  4,  etc  ^  gx.  xxiii.  16  ;  xxxiv.  22.

3  Lev.    xxiii.    34;    and    specially  ver,    43;    Deut.    xvi.    13,    16;    xxxi.    10  ^
2  Chron.  viii.  13  ;  Ezra  iii.  4.


234       ^^^  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

while  its  symbolical  bearing  on  the  future  is  brought  out  in
its  designation  as  emphatically  *'the  feast;" ^  and  "the  Feast
of  Jehovah."  2  In  this  sense  also  Josephus,  Philo,  and  the
Rabbis  (in  many  passages  of  the  Misknah)  single  it  out  from
all  the  other  feasts.  And  quite  decisive  on  the  point  is  the
description  of  the  "latter-day"  glory  at  the  close  of  the
prophecies  of  Zechariah,  where  the  conversion  of  all  nations
is  distinctly  connected  with  the  "  Feast  of  Tabernacles."^
That  this  reference  is  by  no  means  isolated  will  appear  in  the
sequel.

The  "  Feast  of  Tabernacles "  was  the  third  of  the  great
annual  festivals,  at  which  every  male  in  Israel  was  to  appear
before  the  Lord  in  the  place  which  He  should  choose.  It  fell
on  the  15  th  of  the  seventh  month,  or  Tishri  (corresponding  to
September  or  the  beginning  of  October),  as  the  Passover  had
fallen  on  the  iSth  of  the  first  month.  The  significance  of  these
numbers  in  themselves  and  relatively  will  not  escape  attention,
the  more  so  that  this  feast  closed  the  original  festive  calendar ;
for  Purim  and  "  the  feast  of  the  dedication  of  the  Temple,"
w^hich  both  occurred  later  in  the  season,  were  of  post-Mosaic
origin.  The  "  Feast  of  Tabernacles,"  or,  rather  (as  it  should
be  called),  of  "  booths,"  lasted  for  seven  days — from  the  15th
to  the  2 1st  Tishri — and  was  followed  by  an  Octave  on  the
22nd  Tishri.  But  this  eighth  day,  though  closely  connected
with  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  formed  no  part  of  that  feast,
as  clearly  shown  by  the  difference  in  the  sacrifices  and  the
ritual,  and  by  the  circumstance  that  the  people  no  longer
lived  in  "  booths."  The  first  day  of  the  feast,  and  also  its
Octave,  or  Azereth  (clausura^  conclusio),  were  to  be  days  of

*  I  Kings  viii.  2  ;  2  Chroii.  v.  3  ;  vii.  8,  9.     ^  So,  literally,  in  Lev.  xxiiL  39,
3  Zech.  xiv.  16-21.


The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  235

**  holy  convocation/'^  and  each  "  a  Sabbath/'^  not  in  the  sense  of
the  weekly  Sabbath,  but  of  festive  rest  in  the  Lord/  when  no
servile  work  of  any  kind  might  be  done.

There  is  yet  another  important  point  to  be  noticed.  The
"Feast  of  Tabernacles"  followed  closely  on  the  "Day  of
Atonement.*'  Both  took  place  in  the  seventh  month  ;  the  one
on  the  loth,  the  other  on  the  15th  of  Tishri.  What  the  seventh
day,  or  Sabbath,  was  in  reference  to  the  week,  the  seventh
month  seems  to  have  been  in  reference  to  the  year.  It  closed
not  only  the  sacred  cycle,  but  also  the  agricultural  or  work-
ing year.  It  also  marked  the  change  of  seasons,  the  approach
of  rain  and  of  the  winter  equinox,  and  determined  alike  the
commencement  and  the  close  of  a  sabbatical  year.*  Coming  on
the  isth  of  this  seventh  month — that  is,  at  full  moon,  when
the  "sacred"  month  had,  so  to  speak,  attained  its  full  strength
— the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  appropriately  followed  five  days
after  the  Day  of  Atonement,  in  which  the  sin  of  Israel  had
been  removed,  and  its  covenant  relation  to  God  restored.
Thus  a  sanctified  nation  could  keep  a  holy  feast  of  harvest
joy  unto  the  Lord,  just  as  in  the  truest  sense  it  will  be  "  in
that  day  "  *  when  the  meaning  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles
shall  be  really  fulfilled.^

Three  things  specially  marked  the  "Feast  of  Taber-
nacles : "  its  joyous  festivities,  the  dwelling  in  "  booths,"  and  the
peculiar  sacrifices  and  rites  of  the  week.  The  first  of  these
was  simply  characteristic  of  a  "  feast  of  ingathering :  "  "  Be-

1  Lev.  xxiii.  35,  36.  ^  Lev.  xxiii.  39.  ^  Lev.  xxiii.  25,  32.

*  Deut.  xxxi.  10.  '  Zech.  xiv.  20.

*  Quite  another  picture  is  dra\vn  in  Hos.  ix.,  which  seems  also  to  refer  to  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles  (see  specially  verse  5).  Indeed,  it  is  remarkable  how  many
allusions  to  this  feast  occur  in  the  writings  of  the  prophets,  as  if  its  types  were
the  goal  of  all  their  desires.


236       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

cause  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all  thine  increase,
and  in  all  the  works  of  thine  hands,  therefore  thou  shalt  surely
rejoice — thou,  and  thy  son,  and  thy  daughter,  and  thy  man-
servant, and  thy  maidservant,  and  the  Levite,  the  stranger,  and
the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  that  are  within  thy  gates.'  Nor
were  any  in  Israel  to  '*  appear  before  the  Lord  empty :  every
man  shall  give  as  he  is  able,  according  to  the  blessing  of  the
Lord  thy  God  which  He  hath  given  thee."^  Votive,  freewill,
and  peace-ofiferings  would  mark  their  gratitude  to  God,  and  at
the  meal  which  ensued  the  poor,  the  stranger,  the  Levite,  and
the  homeless  would  be  welcome  guests,  for  the  Lord's  sake.
Moreover,  when  the  people  saw  the  Treasury  chests  opened
and  emptied  at  this  feast  for  the  last  time  in  the  year,  they
would  remember  their  brethren  at  a  distance,  in  whose  name,
as  well  as  their  own,  the  daily  and  festive  sacrifices  were
offered.  Thus  their  liberality  would  not  only  be  stimulated,
but  all  Israel,  however  widely  dispersed,  would  feel  itself
anew  one  before  the  Lord  their  God  and  in  the  courts  of  His
House.  There  was,  besides,  something  about  this  feast  which
would  peculiarly  remind  them,  if  not  of  their  dispersion,  yet
of  their  being  "  strangers  and  pilgrims  in  the  earth."  For  its
second  characteristic  was,  that  during  the  seven  days  of  its
continuance  '*all  that  are  Israelites  born  shall  dwell  in  booths;
that  your  generations  may  know  that  I  made  tlie:  children  of
Israel  to  dwell  in  booths  when  I  brought  them  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt."'

As  usual,  we  are  met  at  the  outset  by  a  controversy
between  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees.  The  law  had  it:*
**  Ye  shall  take  you  on  the  first  day  the  fruit*  of  goodly  trees,

*  Deut.  xvi.  13-17.  ^  Lev.  xxiii.  42,  43.  *  Lev.  xxiii    ^o.

*  So  correctly  in  the  margin.


The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  237

branches  of  palm  trees,  and  the  boughs  of  thick  trees,  and
willows  of  the  brook,"  which  the  Sadducees  understood  (as  do
the  modern  Karaite  Jews)  to  refer  to  the  materials  whence
the  booths  were  to  be  constructed,  while  the  Pharisees  applied
It  to  what  the  worshippers  were  to  carry  in  their  hands.  The
latter  interpretation  is,  in  all  likelihood,  the  correct  one  ;  it
seems  borne  out  by  the  account  of  the  festival  at  the  time
of  Nehemiah,^  when  the  booths  were  constructed  of  branches
of  other  trees  than  those  mentioned  in  Leviticus  xxiii.  ;  and
it  was  universally  adopted  in  practice  at  the  time  of  Christ.
The  Mishnah  gives  most  minute  details  as  to  the  height  and
construction  of  these  "  booths,"  the  main  object  being  to
prevent  any  invasion  of  the  law.  Thus  it  must  be  a  real  booth,
and  constructed  of  boughs  of  living  trees,  and  solely  for  the
purposes  of  this  festival.  Hence  it  must  be  high  enough,  yet
not  too  high — at  least  ten  hand-breadths,  but  not  more  than
thirty  feet ;  three  of  its  walls  must  be  of  boughs  ;  it  must  be
fairly  covered  with  boughs,  yet  not  so  shaded  as  not  to  admit
sunshine,  nor  yet  so  open  as  to  have  not  sufficient  shade,  the
object  in  each  case  being  neither  sunshine  nor  shade,  but  that
it  should  be  a  real  booth  of  boughs  of  trees.  It  is  needless  to
enter  into  further  details,  except  to  say  that  these  booths,  and
not  their  houses,  w^ere  to  be  the  regular  dwelling  of  all  in  Israel
during  the  week,  and  that,  except  in  very  hea\y  rain,  they
were  to  eat,  sleep,  pray,  study — in  short,  entirely  to  live  in
them.  The  only  exceptions  were  in  favour  of  those  absent  on
some  pious  duty,  the  sick,  and  their  attendants,^  women,  slaves^
and  infants  who  were  still  depending  on  their  mothers.'
Finally,  the  rule  was  that,  "  whatever  might  contract  Leviti-
cal  defilement  (such  as  boards,  cloth,  etc.),  or  whatever  did

*  Nehemiah  \iii.  15,  iS,  *  Sui:c.  ii.  4.  ^  Sticc.  ii.  8.


238       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services

not  grow  out  of  the  earth,  might  not  be  used  '*  in  constructing
the  "  booths." '

It  has  already  been  noticed  that,  according  to  the  view  uni-
versally prevalent  at  the  time  of  Christ,  the  direction  on  the
first  day  of  the  feast  to  "  take  the  fruit  of  goodly  trees,
branches  of  palm  trees,  and  the  boughs  of  thick  trees,  and
willows  of  the  brook,"  was  applied  to  what  the  w^orshippers
were  to  carry  in  their  hands.  The  Rabbis  ruled,  that  "  the
fruit  of  the  goodly  trees  "  meant  the  cethrog,  or  citron,  and
^*  the  boughs  of  thick  trees  "  the  myrtle,  provided  it  had  **  not
more  berries  than  leaves."  The  cethrogs  must  be  without  ble-
mish or  deficiency  of  any  kind  ;  the  palm  branches  at  least
three  hand-breadths  high,  and  fit  to  be  shaken  ;  and  each
branch  fresh,  entire,  unpolluted,  and  not  taken  from  any  idola-
trous grove.  Every  worshipper  carried  the  cetlirog  in  his  left
hand,  and  in  his  right  the  lulav^  or  palm,  with  myrtle  and
willow  branch  on  either  side  of  it,  tied  together  on  the  outside
with  its  own  kind,  though  in  the  inside  it  might  be  fastened
even  with  gold  thread.^  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  liilav
was  intended  to  remind  Israel  of  the  different  stages  of  their
wilderness  journey,  as  represented  by  the  different  vegetation
— the  palm  branches  recalling  the  valleys  and  plains,  the
*' boughs  of  thick  trees,"  the  bushes  on  the  mountain  heights,  and
the  willows  those  brooks  from  which  God  had  given  His  people
drink  ;^  while  the  cethrog  "wdiS  to  remind  them  of  the  fruits  of
the  good  land  which  the  Lord  had  given  them.  The  lulav
was  used  in  the  Temple  on  each  of  the  seven  festive  days,
even  children,  if  they  were  able  to  shake  it,  being  bound  to
carry  one.     If  the  first  day  of  the  feast  fell  on  a  Sabbath,  the

*  Succ.  i.  4.  2  ^^^^^  jii^  g^

•  See  the  Art.  by  Pressel  in  Herzog's  Real.-EncycL  vol.  viiL


The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  239

people  brought  their  lulavs  on  the  previous  day  into  the  syna-
gogue on  the  Temple  Mount,  and  fetched  them  in  the  morning,
so  as  not  needlessly  to  break  the  Sabbath  rest.

The  third  characteristic  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was
its  offerings.  These  were  altogether  peculiar.  The  sin-
offering  for  each  of  the  seven  days  was  "  one  kid  of  the
goats."  The  burnt-offerings  consisted  of  bullocks,  rams,  and
lambs,  with  their  appropriate  meat-  and  drink-offerings.  But,
whereas  the  number  of  the  rams  and  lambs  rem-xined  the
same  on  each  day  of  the  festival,  that  of  the  bullocks  de-
creased every  day  by  one — from  thirteen  on  the  first  to  seven
bullocks  on  the  last  day,  "  that  great  day  of  the  feast."  As
no  special  injunctions  are  given  about  the  drink-offering,  we
infer  that  it  was,  as  usually,^  -^  of  a  hin  of  wine  for  each  lamb,
\  for  each  ram,  and  4-  for  each  bullock  (the  hin  =  i  gallon
2  pints).  The  "  meat-offering  "  is  expressly  fixed  -  at  -'^  of  an
ephah  of  flour,  mixed  with  ^  of  a  hin  of  oil,  for  each  lamb  ;
-^  of  an  ephah,  with  \  hin  of  oil,  for  each  ram  ;  and  -^  of  an
ephah,  with  \  hin  of  oil,  for  each  bullock.  Three  things  are
remarkable  about  these  burnt-offerings.  First,  they  are
evidently  the  characteristic  sacrifice  of  the  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles. As  compared  with  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,
the  number  of  the  rams  and  lambs  is  double,  while  that  of  the
bullocks  is  fivefold  (14  during  the  Passover  week,  5  x  14
during  that  of  Tabernacles).  Secondly,  the  number  of  the
burnt-sacrifices,  whether  taking  each  kind  by  itself  or  all
of  them  together,  is  always  divisible  by  the  sacred  number
seven.  We  have  for  the  week  70  bullocks,  14  rams,  and
98  lambs,  or  altogether  182  sacrifices  (26  x  7),  to  which  must
be  added  336  (48  x  7)  tenths  of  ephahs  of  flour  for  the  meat-

-••  Numb.  XV.  i-io.  *  Numb.  xxix.  12,  etc.


240        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services*.

offering.  We  will  not  pursue  the  tempting  subject  of  this
symbolism  of  numbers  further  than  to  point  out  that,  whereas
the  sacred  number  7  appeared  at  the  Feast  of  Unleavened
Bread  only  in  the  number  of  its  days,  and  at  Pentecost  in  the
period  of  its  observance  {7  X^  7  days  after  Passover),  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles  lasted  seven  days,  took  place  when  the
seventh  month  was  at  its  full  height,  and  had  the  number  7
impressed  on  its  characteristic  sacrifices.  It  is  not  so  easy  to
account  for  the  third  peculiarity  of  these  sacrifices — that  of
the  daily  diminution  in  the  number  of  bullocks  offered.  The
common  explanation,  that  it  was  intended  to  indicate  the
decreasing  sanctity  of  each  successive  day  of  the  feast,  while
the  sacred  number  7  was  still  to  be  reserved  for  the  last  day,
is  not  more  satisfactory  than  the  view  propounded  in  the
Talmud,  that  these  sacrifices  were  offered,  not  for  Israel,  but
for  the  nations  of  the  world  :  *'  There  were  seventy  bullocks,
to  correspond  to  the  number  of  the  seventy  nations  in  the
world."  But  did  the  Rabbis  understand  the  prophetic  cha-
racter of  this  feast }  An  attentive  tonsideration  of  its  peculiar
ceremonial  will  convince  that  it  must  have  been  exceedingly
difficult  to  ignore  it  entirely.

On  the  day  before  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles — the  14th
Tishri — the  festive  pilgrims  had  all  arrived  in  Jerusalem.
The  *^  booths"  on  the  roofs,  in  the  courtyards,  in  streets  and
squares,  as  well  as  roads  and  gardens,  within  a  Sabbath  day's
journey,  must  have  given  the  city  and  neighbourhood  an .
unusually  picturesque;  appearance.  The  preparation  of  all  that
was  needed  for  the  festival — purification,  the  care  of  the
offerings  that  each  would  bring,  and  friendly  communications
between  those  who  were  to  be  invited  to  the  sacrificial  meal —
no  doubt  sufficiently  occupied  their  time.     When  the  early


The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  241

autumn  evening  set  in,  the  blasts  of  the  priests'  trumpets  on
the  Temple  Mount  announced  to  Israel  the  advent  of  the  feast.
As  at  the  Passover  and  at  Pentecost,  the  altar  of  burnt-
offering  was  cleansed  during  the  first  night-watch,  and  the  gates
of  the  Temple  were  thrown  open  immediately  after  midnight.
The  time  till  the  beginning  of  the  ordinary  morning  sacrifice
was  occupied  in  examining  the  various  sacrifices  and  offerings
that  were  to  be  brought  during  the  day.  While  the  morning
sacrifice  was  being  prepared,  a  priest,  accompanied  by  a  joyous
procession  with  music,  went  down  to  the  Pool  of  Siloam,  whence
he  drew  water  into  a  golden  pitcher,  capable  of  holding  three
log  (rather  more  than  two  pints).  But  on  the  Sabbaths  they
fetched  the  water  from  a  golden  vessel  in  the  Tempe
itself,  into  which  it  had  been  carried  from  Siloam  on  the
preceding  day.  At  the  same  time  that  the  procession  started
for  Siloam,  another  went  to  a  place  in  the  Kedron  valley,
close  by,  called  Motza,  whence  they  brought  willow  branches,
which,  amidst  the  blasts  of  the  priests'  trumpets,  they  stuck
on  either  side  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  bending  them  over
towards  it,  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of  leafy  canopy.  Then  the
ordinary  sacrifice  proceeded,  the  priest  who  had  gone  to
Siloam  so  timing  it,  that  he  returned  just  as  his  brethren
carried  up  the  pieces  of  the  sacrifice  to  lay  them  on  the  altar.
As  he  entered  by  the  "  Water-gate,"  which  obtained  its  name
from  this  ceremony,  he  was  received  by  a  threefold  blast  from
the  priests' trumpets.  The  priest  then  went  up  the  rise  of  the
altar  and  turned  to  the  left,  where  there  were  two  silver  basins
with  narrow  holes — the  eastern  a  little  wider  for  the  wine,  and
the  western  somewhat  narrower  for  the  water.  Into  these  the
wine  of  the  drink-offering  was  poured,  and  at  the  same  time
the  water  from   Siloam,   the  people  shouting  to  the  priest,

R


242        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

"  Raise  thy  hand/'  to  show  that  he  really  poured  the  water
into  the  basin  which  led  to  the  base  of  the  altar.  For,  shar-
ing the  objections  of  the  Sadducees,  Alexander  Jannaeus,  the
Maccabean  king-priest  (about  95  B.C.),  had  shown  his  contempt
for  the  Pharisees  by  pouring  the  water  at  this  feast  upon  the
ground,  on  which  the  people  pelted  him  with  Xki€\x(Bthrogs,  and
would  have  murdered  him,  .if  his  foreign  body-guard  had  not
interfered,  on  which  occasion  no  less  than  six  thousand  Jews
were  killed  in  the  Temple.

As  soon  as  the  wine  and  the  water  were  being  poured  out,  the
Temple  music  began,  and  the  **  Hallel "  ^  was  sung  in  the  man-
ner previously  prescribed,  and  to  the  accompaniment  of  flutes,
except  on  the  Sabbath  and  on  the  first  day  of  the  feast,  when
flute-playing  was  not  allowed,  on  account  of  the  sanctity  of
the  days.  When  the  choir  came  to  these  words,^  "  O  give
thanks  to  the  Lord,"  and  again  when  they  sang,' "  O  work
then  now  salvation,  Jehovah;"  and  once  more  at  the  close,*
"O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,"  all  the  worshippers  shook
their  lulavs  towards  the  altar.  When,  therefore,  the  multitudes
from  Jerusalem,  on  meeting  Jesus,  "  cut  down  branches  from
the  trees,  and  strewed  them  in  the  way,  and  ....  cried,  say-
ing, O  then,  work  now  salvation  to  the  Son  of  David  !  "^  they
applied,  in  reference  to  Christ,  what  was  regarded  as  one  of
the  chief  ceremonies  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  praying
that  God  would  now  from  "  the  highest "  heavens  manifest
and  send  that  salvation  in  connection  with  the  Son  of  David,
which  was  symbolised  by  the  pouring  out  of  water.  For
though  that  ceremony  was  considered  by  the  Rabbis  as  bear-
ing a  subordinate  reference  to  the  dispensation  of  the  rain,  the

*  Psa.  cxiii.-cxviii.  *  Psa.  cxviii.  i.  ^  Psa.  cxviii.  25,

*  Psa.  cxviii.  29.  •  Matt.  xxi.  8,  9 ;  John  xii.  12,  13.


The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  243

annual  fall  of  which  they  imagined  was  determined  by  God  at
that  feast,  its  main  and  real  application  was  to  the  future  out-
pouring of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  predicted — probably  in  allusion
to  this  very  rite — by  Isaiah  the  prophet.^  Thus  the  Talmud
says  distinctly :  "  Why  is  the  name  of  it  called,  The  drawing
out  of  water  ?  Because  of  the  pouring  out  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  according  to  what  is  said  :  '  With  joy  shall  ye  draw
water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation.*  **  Hence,  also,  the  feast
and  the  peculiar  joyousness  of  it  are  alike  designated  as  those
of  "  the  drawing  out  of  water  ; "  for,  according  to  the  same
Rabbinical  authorities,  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  man  only
through  joy.

A  similar  symbolism  was  expressed  by  another  cere-
mony which  took  place  at  the  close,  not  of  the  daily,  but
of  the  festive  sacrifices.  On  every  one  of  the  seven  days
the  priests  formed  in  procession,  and  made  the  circuit  of
the  altar,  singing  :  "  O  then,  now  work  salvation,  Jehovah  !
O  Jehovah,  give  prosperity !  "  ^  But  on  the  seventh,  "  that
great  day  of  the  feast,"  they  made  the  circuit  of  the  altar
seven  times,  remembering  how  the  walls  of  Jericho  had  fallen
in  similar  circumstances,  and  anticipating  how,  by  the  direct
interposition  of  God,  the  walls  of  heathenism  would  fall  before
Jehovah,  and  the  land  lie  open  for  His  people  to  go  in  and
possess  it.

We  can  now  in  some  measure  realise  the  event  recorded  in

^  Isaiah  xii.  3.  Of  course,  one  or  other  of  these  two  views  is  open,  either,  that
the  words  of  Isaiah  were  based  on  the  ceremony  of  water- pouring,  or  that  this  cere-
mony was  derived  from  the  words  of  Isaiah.  In  either  case,  however,  our  inference
from  it  holds  good.  It  is  only  fair  to  add,  that  by  some  the  expression  **  water  "  in
Isa.  xii.  3,  is  applied  to  the  *  *  law. "  But  this  in  no  way  vitiates  our  conclusion,  as
the  Jews  expected  the  general  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  to  be  a  conversion  to
Judaism.

*  Psa.  cxviii.  25  » ^*


244        T"^^  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

John  vii.  37.  The  festivities  of  the  Week  of  Tabernacles
were  drawing  to  a  close.  "  It  was  the  last  day,  that  great  day
of  the  feast."  It  obtained  this  name,  although  it  was  not  one
of  "  holy  convocation,'*  partly  because  it  closea  the  feast,  and
partly  from  the  circumstances  which  procured  it  in  Rabbinical
writings  the  designations  of  "  Day  of  the  Great  Hosannah,"  on
account  of  the  sevenfold  circuit  of  the  altar  with  "  Hosannah  ;"
and  **  Day  of  Willows,"  and  ''  Day  of  Beating  the  Branches,"
because  all  the  leaves  were  shaken  off  the  willow  boughs,
and  the  palm  branches  beaten  in  pieces  by  the  side  of  the
rltar.  It  was  on  that  day,  after  the  priest  had  returned  from
Siloam  with  his  golden  pitcher,  and  for  the  last  time  poured
its  contents  to  the  base  of  the  altar ;  after  the  "  Hallel "  had
been  sung  to  the  sound  of  the  flute,  the  people  responding  and
worshipping  as  the  priests  three  times  drew  the  threefold
blasts  from  their  silver  trumpets — just  when  the  interest  of
the  people  had  been  raised  to  its  highest  pitch,  that,  from
amidst  the  mass  of  worshippers,  who  were  waving  towards
the  altar  quite  a  forest  of  leafy  branches  as  the  last  words  of
Psa.  cxviii.  were  chanted — a  voice  was  raised  which  resounded
through  the  Temple,  startled  the  multitude,  and  carried  fear
and  hatred  to  the  hearts  of  their  leaders.  It  was  Jesus,  who
**  stood  and  cried,  saying,  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come
unto  Me,  and  drink.'^  Then  by  faith  in  Him  should  each  one
truly  become  like  the  Pool  of  Siloam,  and  from  his  inmost
being  '*  rivers  of  living  waters  flow."  ^  *'  This  spake  He  of
the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  Him  should  receive."
Thus  the  significance  of  the  rite,  in  which  they  had  just  taken
part,  was  not  only  fully  explained,  but  the  mode  of  its  fulfilment
pointed  out.     The  eff"ect  was  instantaneous.     It  could  not  but

*  John  vii.  38.


The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  245

be,  that  in  that  vast  assembly,  so  suddenly  roused  by  being
brought  face  to  face  with  Him  in  whom  every  type  and  pro-
phecy is  fulfilled,  there  would  be  many  who,  "  v/hen  they  heard
this  saying,  said,  Of  a  truth  this  is  the  Prophet.  Others  said,
This  is  the  Christ."  Even  the  Temple-guard,  whose  duty  it
would  have  been  in  such  circumstances  to  arrest  one  who  had
so  interrupted  the  services  of  the  day,  and  presented  himself
to  the  people  in  such  a  light,  owned  the  spell  of  His  words,  and
dared  not  to  lay  hands  on  Him.  **  Never  man  spake  like  this
man,"  was  the  only  account  they  could  give  of  their  unusual
weakness,  in  answer  to  the  reproaches  of  the  chief  priests  and
Pharisees.  The  rebuke  of  the  Jewish  authorities,  which  followed,
is  too  characteristic  to  require  comment.  One  only  of  their
number  had  been  deeply  moved  by  the  scene  just  witnessei
in  the  Temple.  Yet,  timid  as  usually,  Nicodemus  only  laid
hold  of  this  one  point,  that  the  Pharisees  had  traced  the  popular
confession  of  Jesus  to  their  ignorance  of  the  law,  to  which  he
replied,  in  the  genuine  Rabbinical  manner  of  arguing,  without
meeting  one's  opponent  face  to  face:  "Doth  our  law  judge
any  man  before  it  hear  him,  and  know  what  he  doeth  } "

But  matters  were  not  to  end  with  the  wrangling  of  priests
and  Pharisees.  The  proof  which  Nicodemus  had  invited  them
to  seek  from  the  teaching  and  the  miracles  of  Christ  was  about
to  be  displayed  both  before  the  people  and  their  rulers  in  the
healing  of  the  blind  man.  Here  also  it  was  in  allusion  to  the
ceremonial  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  that  Jesus,  when  He  saw
the  " man  blind  from  his  birth,'*  said:  ''As  long  as  I  am  in  the
world,  I  am  the  light  of  the  world  ;  "  having  "  anointed  the  eyes
of  the  blind  man  with  the  clay,"  just  as  He  told  him,  "  Go,
wash  in  the  Pool  of  Siloam  (which  is,  by  interpretation,  Sent)."

,  *  John  ix.  5.


246       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

For  the  words,  "  I  am  the  Hght  of  the  world,"  are  the  same
which  He  had  just  spoken  in  the  Temple,^  and  they  had  in  all
probability  been  intended  to  point  to  another  very  peculiar
ceremony  which  took  place  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  In
the  words  of  the  Mishnah^"  the  order  of  the  services  for  that
feast  was  as  follows :  "  They  went  first  to  offer  the  daily
sacrifice  in  the  morning,  then  the  additional  sacrifices  ;  after
that  the  votive  and  freewill-offerings ;  from  thence  to  the
festive  meal ;  from  thence  to  the  study  of  the  law  ;  and  after
that  to  offer  the  evening  sacrifice;  and  from  thence  they  went  to
the  joy  of  the  pouring  out  of  the  water."  It  is  this  *'  joy  of  the
pouring  out  of  the  water"  which  we  are  about  to  describe.

At  the  close  of  the  first  day  of  the  feast  the  worshippers
descended  to  the  Court  of  the  Women,  where  great  preparations
had  been  made.  Four  golden  candelabras  were  there,  each  with
four  golden  bowls,  and  against  them  rested  four  ladders ;  and
four  youths  of  priestly  descent  held,  each  a  pitcher  of  oil,  capable
of  holding  one  hundred  and  twenty  log,  from  which  they  filled
each  bowl.  The  old,  worn  breeches  and  girdles  of  the  priests
served  for  wicks  to  these  lamps.  There  was  not  a  court  in
Jerusalem  that  was  not  lit  up  by  the  light  of  "the  house  of
water-pouring."  The  **  Chassidim  "  and  **  the  men  of  Deed  *'
danced  before  the  people  with  flaming  torches  in  their  hands,
and  sang  before  them  hymns  and  songs  of  praise  ;  and  the
Levites,  with  harps,  and  lutes,  and  cymbals,  and  trumpets,  and
instruments  of  music  without  number,  stood  upon  the  fifteen
steps  which  led  doww  from  the  Court  of  Israel  to  that  of  the
Women,  according  to  the  number  of  the  fifteen  Songs  of
Degrees  in  the  Book  of  Psalms.  They  stood  with  their  instru-
ments of  music,  and  sang  hymns.     Two  priests,  with  trumpets

*  John  viii.  12.  *  Suuah  v,  2,  3,  4.


The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  247

in  their  hands,  were  at  the  upper  gate  (that  of  Nicanor),  which
led  from  the  Court  of  Israel  to  that  of  the  women.  At  cock-
crowing  they  drew  a  threefold  blast.  As  they  reached  the  tenth
step,  they  drew  another  threefold  blast;  as  they  entered  the
court  itself,  they  drew  yet  another  threefold  blast ;  and  so  they
blew  as  they  advanced,  till  they  reached  the  gate  which  opens
upon  the  east  (the  Beautiful  Gate).  As  they  came  to  the  eastern
gate,  they  turned  round  towards  the  west  (to  face  the  Holy
Place),  and  said  :  **  Our  fathers  who  were  in  this  place,  they
turned  their  back  upon  the  Sanctuary  of  Jehovah,  and  their
faces  toward  the  east,  and  they  worshipped  towards  the  rising
sun  ;  but  as  for  us,  our  eyes  are  towards  the  Lord.'*

A  fragment  of  one  of  the  hymns  sung  that  night  has  been
preserved.     It  was  sung  by  the  "  Chassidim  '*  and  "  men  of
Deed,"  and  by  those  who  did  penance  in  their  old  age  for  the
,  sins  of  their  youth  :

The  Chassidim  and  Men  of  Deed*
**  Oh  joy,  that  our  youth,  devoted,  sage,
Doth  bring  no  shame  upon  our  old  age  I"

The  Penitents,
•*  Oh  joy,  we  can  in  our  old  age
Repair  the  sins  of  youth  not  sage  !  **

Both  in  unison,
••  Yes,  happy  he  on  whom  no  early  guilt  doth  rest,
And  he  who,  having  sinned,  is  now  with  pardon  blest*

It  seems  clear  that  this  illumination  of  the  Temple  was
regarded  as  forming  part  of,  and  having  the  same  symbolical
meaning  as,  "  the  pouring  out  of  water."  The  light  shining
out  of  the  Temple  into  the  darkness  around,  and  lighting  up
every  court  in  Jerusalem,  must  have  been  intended  as  a  symbol
not  only  of  the  Shechinah  which  once  filled  the  Temple,  but
of  that  '*  great  light "  which  "  the  people  that  walked  in  dark-


248       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

ness  "  were  to  see,  and  which  was  to  shine  "  upon  them  that
dwell  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death."  ^  May  it  not  be,  that
such  prophecies  as  Isaiah  ix.  and  Ix.  were  connected  with  this
symbolism  ?  At  any  rate,  it  seems  most  probable  that  Jesus
had  referred  to  this  ceremony  in  the  words  spoken  by  Him  in
the  Temple  at  that  very  Feast  of  Tabernacles  :  "  I  am  the
light  of  the  world;  he  that  foUoweth  Me  shall  not  walk  in
darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life/'^

Only  the  first  of  the  seven  days  of  this  feast  was  *'  a  holy
convocation ;  **  the  other  six  were  "  minor  festivals."  On
each  day,  besides  the  ordinary  morning  and  evening  sacri-
fices, the  festive  offerings  prescribed  in  Numbers  xxix.
12-38  were  brought.  The  Psalms  sung  at  the  drink-
offering  after  the  festive  sacrifices  (or  Musaphy  as  they  are
called),  were,  for  the  first  day  of  the  feast.  Psalm  cv. ;  for
the  second,  Psalm  xxix. ;  for  the  third.  Psalm  1.,  from  ver.
16;  for  the  fourth.  Psalm  xciv.,  from  ver.  16;  for  the  fifth,
Psalm  xciv.,  from  ver.  8  ;  for  the  sixth.  Psalm  Ixxxi.,  from
ver.  6 ;  for  the  last  day  of  the  feast,  Psalm  Ixxxii.,  from
ver.  5.  As  the  people  retired  from  the  altar  at  the  close
of  each  day^s  service,  they  exclaimed,  "How  beautiful  art
thou,  O  altar  !  " — or,  according  to  a  later  version,  "  We  give
thanks  to  Jehovah  and  to  thee,  O  altar!"  All  the  four-and-
twenty  orders  of  the  priesthood  were  engaged  in  the  festive
offerings,  which  were  apportioned  among  them  according  to
definite  rules,  which  also  fixed  how  the  priestly  dues  were  to
be  divided  among  them.  Lastly,  on  every  sabbatical  year
the  law  was  to  be  publicly  read  on  the  first  day  of  the  feast.^

On   the  afternoon  of   the   seventh   day  of   the   feast   the

^  Isa.  ix.  2.  ^  John  viii.  12.

*  Deut.  xxxi.  10-13.      In  later  times  only  certain  portions  were  read,  the  law
as  a  whole  being  sufficiently  known  from  the  weekly  prelections  in  the  synagogue^


^4  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  249

people  began  to  remove  from  the  **  booths/*  For  at  the
Octave,  on  the  22nd  of  Tishri,  they  lived  no  longer  in  booths,
nor  did  they  use  the  lidav.  But  it  was  observed  as  "  a  holy
convocation  ;"  and  the  festive  sacrifices  prescribed  in  Num-
bers xxix.  36-38  were  offered,  although  no  more  by  all  the
twenty-four  courses  of  priests,  and  finally  the  "  Hallel "  sung
at  the  drink-offering.

It  will  have  been  observ^ed  that  the  two  most  important
ceremonies  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles — the  pouring  out
of  water  and  the  illumination  of  the  Temple — were  of  post-
Mosaic  origin.  According  to  Jewish  tradition,  the  pillar  of
cloud  by  day  and  of  fire  by  night  had  first  appeared  to  Israel
on  the  15  th  of  Tishri,  the  first  day  of  the  feast.  On  that
day  also  Moses  was  said  to  have  come  down  from  the  Mount,
and  announced  to  the  people  that  the  Tabernacle  of  God
was  to  be  reared  among  them.  We  know  that  the  dedica-
tion of  Solomon's  Temple  and  the  descent  of  the  Shechinah
took  place  at  this  feast.^  Nor  can  we  greatly  err  in  finding
an  allusion  to  it  in  this  description  of  heavenly  things  -.^
"After  this  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  great  multitude,  which  no
man  could  number,  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,
and  tongues,  stood  before  the  throne,  and  before  the  Lamb,
clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands  ;  and
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Salvation  to  our  God,  which
sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb.'**

Whether  or  not  our  suggestions  be  adopted  as  to  the
typical  meaning  of  the  two  great  ceremonies  of  the  "  pouring
out  of  the  water "  and  the  Temple  illu-mination,  the  fact
remains,  that  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  the  one  only  type
in  the  Old  Testament  which  has  not  yet  been  fulfilled.

*  I  Kings  viii.  ;  2  Chron.  vii.  *  ^  Rev.  vii.  9,  10.


CHAPTER   XV.

THE  NEW  MOONS  :  THE  FEAST  OF  THE  SEVENTH  NEW  MOON,
OR  OF  TRUMPETS,  OR  NEW  YEAR'S  DAY.

*'Let  no  man  therefore  judge  you  in  meat,  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of  an  holy
day,  or  of  the  new  moon,  or  of  the  Sabbath  :  which  are  a  shadow  of  things
to  come;  but  the  body  is  of  Christ.'' — Col.  ii.  i6,  17.

SCARCELY  any  other  festive  season  could  have  left  so  con-
tinuous an  impress  on  the  religious  life  of  Israel  as  the
**  New  Moons."  Recurring  at  the  beginning  of  every  month,
and  marking  it,  the  solemn  proclamation  of  the  day,  by—
"  It  is  sanctified,"  was  intended  to  give  a  hallowed  character
to  each  month,  while  the  blowing  of  the  priests*  trumpets  and
the  special  sacrifices  brought,  would  summon,  as  it  were,  the
Lord's  host  to  offer  their  tribute  unto  their  exalted  King,
and  thus  bring  themselves  into  *' remembrance  "  before  Him.
Besides,  it  was  also  a  popular  feast,  when  families,  like  that  of
David,  might  celebrate  their  special  annual  sacrifice;*  when  the
king  gave  a  state-banquet  f  and  those  who  sought  for  instruc-
tion and  edification  resorted  to  religious  meetings,  such  as
Elisha  seems  to  have  held.^  And  so  we  trace  its  observance
onwards  through  the  history  of  Israel ;  marking  in  Scripture  a

1  I  Sam.  XX.  6,  29.  2  j  g^m.  xx.  5,  24.  *  2  Kings  iv.  23.


The  New  Moons.  251

special  Psalm  for  the  New  Moon  (in  Tishri) ;  ^  noting  how
from  month  to  month  the  day  was  kept  as  an  outward  ordi-
nance, even  in  the  decay  of  religious  life,'^  apparently  all  the
more  rigidly,  with  abstinence  from  work,  not  enjoined  in  the
law,  that  its  spirit  was  no  longer  understood  ;^  and  finally
learning  from  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel  that  it
also  had  a  higher  meaning,  and  was  destined  to  find  a  better
fulfilment  in  another  dispensation,  when  the  New  Moon  trumpet
should  summon  '*  all  flesh  to  worship  before  Jehovah,''*  and  the
closed  eastern  gate  to  the  inner  court  of  the  new  Temple  be
opened  once  more  to  believing  Israel.^  And  in  New  Testa-
ment times  we  still  find  the  *'  New  Moon  "  kept  as  an  outv/ard
observance  by  Jews  and  Judaising  Christians,  yet  expressly
characterised  as  "  a  shadow  of  things  to  come  ;  but  the  body
is  of  Christ."

We  have  already  shown  of  what  importance  the  right
determination  of  the  new  moon  was  in  fixing  the  various
festivals  of  the  year,  and  with  what  care  and  anxiety  its
appearance  was  ascertained  from  witnesses  who  had  actually
seen  it ;  also  how  the  tidings  were  afterwards  communicated
to  those  at  a  distance.  For  the  new  moon  was  reckoned  by
actual  personal  observation,  not  by  astronomical  calculation,
with  which,  however,  as  we  know,  many  of  the  Rabbis  must
have  been  familiar,  since  we  read  of  astronomical  pictures,
by  which  they  were  wont  to  test  the  veracity  of  witnesses.
So  important  was  it  deemed  to  have  faithful  witnesses,  that
they  were  even  allowed,  in  order  to  reach  Jerusalem  in  time,
to  travel  on  the  Sabbath,  and,  if  necessary,  to  make  use, of

•  Psa.  Ixxxi.  3.  *  Isa.  i.  13  ;  Hos.  ii.  II,

•  Amos  viii.  5,  *  I^  Ixvi.  23.

•  Ezek.  xlvL  i.  •  Col.  ii.  16,  17.


252        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

horse  or  mule.^  While  strict  rules  determined  who  were  not
to  be  admitted  as  witnesses,^  every  encouragement  was  given
to  trustworthy  persons,  and  the  Sanhedrim  provided  for  them
a  banquet  in  a  large  building  specially  destined  for  that
purpose,  and  known  as  the  Beth  Yaazek,^  In  the  law  of
God  only  these  two  things  are  enjoined  in  the  observance
of  the  *^New  Moon," — the  *' blowing  of  trumpets"*  and
special  festive  sacrifices.*'^  Of  old  the  **  blowing  of  trumpets"
had  been  the  signal  for  IsfaeFs  host  on  their  march  through
the  wilderness,  as  it  afterwards  summoned  them  to  warfare,
and  proclaimed  or  marked  days  of  public  rejoicing,  and
feasts,  as  well  as  the  *' beginnings  of  their  months."®  The
object  of  it  is  expressly  stated  to  have  been  "  for  a  memorial,"
that  they  might  "  be  remembered  before  Jehovah,"  it  being
specially  added  :  **  I  am  Jehovah  your  God."  It  was,  so  to
speak,  the  host  of  God  assembled,  waiting  for  their  leader ;
the  people  of  God  united  to  proclaim  their  King.  At  the
blast  of  the  priests'  trumpets  they  ranged  themselves,  as  it
were,  under  His  banner  and  before  His  throne,  and  this
symbolical  confession  and  proclamation  of  Him  as  "Jehovah
their  God,"  brought  them  before  Him  to  be  "  remembered  "
and  *'  saved."  And  so  every  season  of  "  blowing  the  trum-
pets," whether  at  New  Moons,  at  the  Feast  of  Trumpets  or
New  Year's  Day,  at  other  festivals,  in  the  Sabbatical  and
Year  of  Jubilee,  or  in  the  time  of  war,  was  a  public  acknow*
ledgment  of  Jehovah  as  King.  Accordingly  we  find  the
same  symbols  adopted  in  the  figurative  language  of  the
New  Testament.  As  of  old  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  sum-
moned the  congregation  before  the  Lord  at  the  door  of  the

*  Mish,  Rosh  ha  Sh.  i.  9 ;  iii.  2.  ^  u,s,  i.  8.  ^  u^s,  ii.  5.

*  Numb.  X.  10.  *  Numb,  xxviii.  11-15.  ^  Numb.  x.  i-io.


The  New  Moons.  253

Tabernacle,  so  "  His  elect "  shall  be  summoned  by  the  sound
of  the  trumpet  in  the  day  of  Christ's  coming/  and  not
only  the  living,  but  those  also  who  had  "  slept  "^ — **the  dead
in  Christ."^  Similarly  the  heavenly  hosts  are  marshalled  to
the  war  of  successive  judgments,*  till,  as  "  the  seventh  angel
sounded,"  Christ  is  proclaimed  King  universal :  '*  The  king-
doms of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,
and  of  His  Christ,  and  He  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."^

Besides  the  *' blowing  of  trumpets,"  certain  festive  sacri-
fices were  ordered  to  be  offered  on  the  New  Moon.^  These
most  appropriately  mark  "the  beginnings  of  months."^  For
it  is  a  universal  principle  in  the  Old  Testament,  that  "  the
first"  always  stands  for  the  whole — the  firstfruits  for  the
whole  harvest,  the  firstborn  and  the  firstlings  for  all  the  rest ;
and  that  "  if  the  firstfruit  be  holy,  the  lump  is  also  holy."
And  so  the  burnt-offerings  and  the  sin-offering  at  '^  the
beginning"  of  each  month  consecrated  the  whole.  These
festive  sacrifices  consisted  of  two  young  bullocks,  one  ram,
and  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  for  a  burnt-offering,  with
their  appropriate  meat-  and  drink-offerings,  and  also  of  "  one
kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering  unto  Jehovah."^

When  we  pass  from  these  simple  Scriptural  directions  to

^  Matt.  xxiv.  31.     *  I  Cor.  xv,  52.     ^  I  Thess.  iv.  16.     *  Rev.  viii.  2 ;  x.  7.

*  Rev.  xi.  15.  ^  Numb.  xxviiL  I1-15.  "^  Numb,  xxviii.  ii.

s  There  is  a  curious  and  somewhat  blasphemous  Haggadak,  or  story,  in  the
Talmud  on  this  subject  It  appears  that  at  first  the  sun  and  moon  had  been  created
of  equal  size,  but  that  when  the  moon  wished  to  be  sole  * '  ruler  "  to  the  exclusion
of  the  sun,  her  jealousy  was  punished  by  diminution.  In  reply  to  her  arguments
and  importunity,  God  had  then  tried  to  comfort  the  moon,  that  the  three  righteous
men,  Jacob,  Salnuel,  and  David,  were  likewise  to  be  small — and  when  even  thus  the
moon  had  the  better  of  the  reasoning,  God  had  directed  that  a  '*  sin-offering  "
should  be  brought  on  the  new  moon,  because  He  had  made  the  moon  smaller  and
less  important  than  the  sun  !


254      The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

what  tradition  records  of  the  actual  observance  of  "  New
Moons"  in  the  Temple,  our  difficulties  increase.  For  this
and  New  Year's  Day  are  just  such  feasts,  in  connection  with
which  superstition  would  most  readily  grow  up,  from  the
notions  which  the  Rabbis  had,  that  at  changes  of  seasons
Divine  judgments  were  initiated,  modified,  or  finally  fixed.

Modern  critics  have  not  been  sufficiently  careful  in  distin-
guishing what  had  been  done  in  the  Temple  from  what  was
introduced  into  the  synagogue,  gradually  and  at  much  later
periods.  Thus,  prayers  which  date  long  after  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem  have  been  represented  as  offered  in  the  Temple,
and  the  custom  of  chanting  the  **  Hallel  "  ^  on  New  Moons  in
the  synagogue  has  been  erroneously  traced  to  Biblical  times.^
So  far  as  we  can  gather,  the  following  was  the  order  of
service  on  New  Moon's  Day.  The  Council  sat  from  early
morning  to  just  before  the  evening  sacrifice,  to  determine
the  appearance  of  the  new  moon.  The  proclamation  of  the
Council — "  It  is  sanctified  !  " — and  not  the  actual  appearance
of  the  new  moon,  determined  the  commencement  of  the  feast.
Immediately  afterwards,  the  priests  blew  the  trumpets  which
marked  the  feast.  After  the  ordinary  morning  sacrifice,  the
prescribed  festive  offerings  were  brought,  the  blood  of  the
burnt-offerings  being  thrown  round  the  base  of  the  altar
below  the  red  line,  and  the  rest  poured  out  into  the  channel
at  the  south  side  of  the  altar  ;  while  the  blood  of  the  sin-
offering  was  sprinkled  or   dropped  from  the  finger  on  the

1  Psa.  cxiii.-cxviii.

•  This  even  by  Buxtorf,  in  his  Lex,  Rabb.,  and  also  by  Dr.  Ginsburg  in  Kitto's
Cycl.f  vol.  iii.  In  general,  articles  on  the  **New  Moon"  and  "  New  Year,"  not-
withstanding their  ability,  do  not  display  sufficient  critical  discernment  on  the
part  of  their  author.  That  the  **  Hallel  "  was  not  sung  in  the  Temple  on  New
Moons  is  shown  by  Jost.,  Gesch,  d.  Judenth.^  i.  184.


The  New  Moons.  255

horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  beginning  from  the
east,  the  rest  being  poured  out,  as  that  of  the  burnt-offerings.
The  two  bullocks  of  the  burnt-offerings  were  hung  up  and
flayed  on  the  uppermost  of  the  three  rows  of  hooks  in  the
court,  the  rams  on  the  middle,  and  the  lambs  on  the  lowest
hooks.  In  all  no  less  than  107  priests  officiated  at  this
burnt-offering — 20  with  every  bullock,  ii  with  every  ram,
and  8  with  every  lamb,  including,  of  course,  those  who
carried  the  appropriate  meat-  and  drink-offerings.  At  the
offering  of  these  sacrifices  the  trumpets  were  again  blown.
All  of  them  were  slain  at  the  north  side  of  the  altar,  while
the  peace-  and  freewill-offerings,  which  private  Israelites  were
wont  at  such  seasons  to  bring,  were  sacrificed  at  the  south
side.  The  flesh  of  the  sin-offering  and  what  of  the  meat-
offering came  to  them,  was  eaten  by  the  priests  in  the  Temple
itself  ;  their  portion  of  the  private  thank-offerings  might  be
taken  by  them  to  their  homes  in  Jerusalem,  and  there  eaten
with  their  households.

If  any  special  prayers  were  said  in  the  Temple  on  New
Moons'  Days,  tradition  has  not  preserved  them,  the  only
formula  dating  from  that  period  being  that  used  on  first
seeing  the  moon — "  Blessed  be  He  who  reneweth  the  months."
To  this  the  synagogue,  towards  the  close  of  the  third
century,  added  the  following :  **  Blessed  be  He  by  whose
word  the  heavens  were  created,  and  by  the  breath  of  whose
mouth  all  the  hosts  thereof  were  formed  !  He  '  appointed
them  a  law  and  time,  that  they  should  not  overstep  their
course.  They  rejoice  and  are  glad  to  perform  the  wiil  of
their  Creator,  Author  of  truth  ;  their  operations  are  truth !
He  spoke  to  the  moon,  Be  thou  renewed,  and  be  the  beautiful
diadem   (Z.^.,  the  hope)  of  man  (/.V.,  Israel),  who   shall  on©


256        The   Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

day  be  quickened  again  like  the  moon  (i.e.^  at  the  coming
of  Messiah),  and  praise  their  Creator  for  His  glorious  king-
dom. Blessed  be  He  who  reneweth  the  moons." ^  At  a  yet
much  later  period,  a  very  superstitious  prayer  was  next
inserted,  its  repetition  being  accompanied  by  leaping  towards
the  moon  !  New  Moon's  Day,  though  apparently  observed
in  the  time  of  Amos  as  a  day  of  rest,^  is  not  so  kept  by
the  Jews  in  our  days,  nor,  indeed,  was  abstinence  from  work
enjoined  in  the  Divine  law.^

Quite  distinct  from  the  other  new  moons,  and  more  sacred
than  they,  was  that  of  the  seventh  month,  or  Tishriy  partly
on  account  of  the  symbolical  meaning  of  the  seventh  or
sabbatical  month,  in  which  the  great  feasts  of  the  Day  of
Atonement  and  of  Tabernacles  occurred,  and  partly,  perhaps,
because  it  also  marked  the  commencement  of  the  civil  year,
always  supposing  that,  as  Josephus  and  most  Jewish  writers
maintain,  the  distinction  between  the  sacred  and  civil  year
dates  from  the  time  of  Moses.*  In  Scripture  this  feast  is
designated  as  the  "memorial  blowing,"^  or  "the  day  of
blowing,"®  because  on  that  day  the  trumpets,  or  rather,  as

1  The  article  ** New  Moon"  in  Kitto's  Cycl.  erroneously  states  that  not  only
this  prayer,  but  even  the  much  later  superstitious  addition  was  **  during  the  period
of  the  second  Temple  offered  up  by  every  Israelite. "  But  comp.  Jost.  Gesch,  d.
yudenth,,  ii.  265,  266,  where  the  time  of  their  origin  is  traced.

2  Amos  viii.  5.

3  The  Talmud  has  this  curious  story  in  explanation  of  the  custom  that  women
abstain  from  work  on  New  Moons — that  the  women  had  refused  to  give  their  ear-
rings for  the  golden  calf,  while  the  men  gave  theirs,  whereas,  on  the  other  hand,
the  Jewish  females  contributed  their  ornaments  for  the  Tabernacle.

*  In  another  place  we  have  adopted  the  common,  modem  view,  that  this  distinc-
tion only  dates  from  the  return  from  Babylon.  But  it  must  be  admitted  that  the
weight  of  authority  is  all  on  the  other  side.  The  Jews  hold  that  the  world  was
created  in  the  month  Tishri.

^  Lev.  xxiii.  24.  Numb,  xxix,  I.


The  New  Moons.  257

we  shall  see,  the  horns  were  blown  all  day  long  in  Jerusalem.
It  was  to  be  observed  as  "  a  Sabbath,"  and  "  a  holy  convoca-
tion," in  which  *'  no  servile  work  "  might  be  done.  The  pre-
scribed offerings  for  the  day  consisted,  besides  the  ordinary
morning  and  evening  sacrifices,  first,  of  the  burnt-offerings,
but  not  the  sin-offerings  of  ordinary  new  moons,  with  their
meat-  and  drink-offerings,  and  after  that,  of  another  festive
burnt-offering  of  one  young  bullock,  one  ram,  and  seven
lambs,  with  their  appropriate  meat-  and  drink-offerings,
together  with  ''  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering,  to
make  an  atonement  for  you."  While  the  drink-offering  of
the  festive  sacrifice  was  poured  out,  the  priests  and  Levites
chanted  Psalm  Ixxxi.,  and  if  the  feast  fell  on  a  Thursday,
for  which  that  Psalm  was,  at  any  rate,  prescribed,  it  was
sung  twice,  beginning  the  second  time  at  verse  7  in  the
Hebrew  text,  or  verse  6  of  our  Authorised  Version.  At  the
evening  sacrifice  Psalm  xxix.  was  sung.  For  reasons  pre-
viously explained,^  it  became  early  common  to  observe  the
New  Year's  Feast  on  two  successive  days,  and  the  practice
may  have  been  introduced  in  Temple  times.

The  Mishitahy  which  devotes  a  special  tractate  to  this
feast,  remarks  that  a  year  may  be  arranged  according  to  four
different  periods ;  the  first,  beginning  with  the  1st  of  Nisan,
being  for  *'  kings  "  (to  compute  taxation)  and  for  computing
the  feasts  ;  the  second,  on  the  1st  of  Elul  (the  sixth  month),
for  tithing  flocks  and  herds,  any  animal  born  after  that  not
being  reckoned  within  the  previous  year ;  the  third,  on  the
1st  of  Tishri  (the  seventh  month),  for  the  Civil,  the  Sab-
batical, and  the  Jubilee  year,  also  for  trees  and  herbs  ;  and
lastly,  that  on  the   ist  of  Shebat  (the  eleventh  month),  for

^  Chiefly  to  prevent  possible  mistakes.

6


258       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

all  fruits  of  trees.  Similarly,  continues  the  Mishnah,  there
are  four  seasons  when  judgment  is  pronounced  upon  the
world  :  at  the  Passover,  in  regard  to  the  harvest ;  at  Pentecost,
in  regard  to  the  fruits  of  trees  ;  on  the  Feast  of  Tabernacle^
in  regard  to  the  dispensation  of  rain ;  while  on  "  New  Year's
Day  all  the  children  of  men  pass  before  Him  like  lambs
(when  they  are  counted  for  the  tithing),  as  it  is  written/
'  He  fashioneth  their  hearts  alike  ;  He  considereth  all  their
works/  "  To  this  we  may  add,  as  a  comment  of  the  Talmud,
that  on  New  Year's  Day  three  books  were  opened — that  of
life  for  those  whose  works  had  been  good  ;  another  of  death,
for  those  who  had  been  thoroughly  evil ;  and  a  third,  inters
mediate,  for  those  whose  case  was  to  be  decided  on  flie
Day  of  Atonement  (ten  days  after  New  Year),  the  delay
being  granted  for  repentance,  or  otherwise,  after  which  their
names  would  be  finally  entered,  either  in  the  book  of  life,  or
in  that  of  death.  By  these  terms,  however,  eternal  life  or
death  are  not  necessarily  meant ;  rather  earthly  well-being,
and,  perhaps,  temporal  life,  or  the  opposite.  It  is  not
necessary  to  explain  at  length  on  what  Scriptural  passages
this  curious  view  about  the  three  books  is  supposed  to  rest.^
But  so  deep  and  earnest  are  the  feelings  of  the  Rabbis  on
this  matter,  that  by  universal  consent  the  ten  days  inter-
vening between  New  Year  and  the  Day  of  Atonement  are
regarded  as  "  days  of  repentance.'*  Indeed,  from  a  mis-
understanding of  a  passage  in  the  Mishiah^  a  similar  super-

i  Psa.  xxxiii.  15.

*  The  two  principal  passages  are  Psa.  Ixix.  28,  and  Ex.  xxxii.  32 ;  the  former
IS  thus  explained  :  **  Let  them  be  blotted  out  of  the  book,"  which  means  the  book
of  the  wicked,  while  the  expression  **of  the  living"  refers  to  that  of  the  righteous,
so  that  the  next  clause,  "  and  not  be  written  with  the  righteous,"  is  supposed  to
indicate  the  existence  of  a  third  or  intermediate  book  1  *  Sheb.  i.  4,  S«


The  New  Moons.  259

stition  attaches  to  every  new  moon,  the  day  preceding  it
being  kept  by  rigid  Jews  as  one  of  fasting  and  repentance,
and  called  the  "  Lesser  Day  of  Atonement."  In  accordance
with  this  the  Rabbis  hold  that  the  blowing  of  the  trumpets
is  intended,  first,  to  bring  Israel,  or  rather  the  merits  of  the
patriarchs  and  God's  covenant  with  them,  in  remembrance
before  the  Lord  ;  secondly,  to  be  a  means  of  confounding
Satan,  who  appears  on  that  day  specially  to  accuse  Israel ;
and,  lastly,  as  a  call  to  repentance — as  it  were,  a  blast  to
wake  men  from  their  sleep  of  sin.^

During  the  whole  of  New  Year's  Day,  trumpets  and  horns
were  blown  in  Jerusalem  from  morning  to  evening.  In  the
Temple  it  was  done,  even  on  a  Sabbath,  but  not  outside
its  walls.  Since  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  this  restriction
has  been  removed,  and  the  horn  is  blown  in  every  synagogue,
even  though  the  feast  fall  upon  a  Sabbath.  It  has  already
been  hinted  that  the  instruments  used  were  not  the  ordinary
priests*  trumpets,  but  horns.  The  Mishnah  holds  that  any
kind  of  horns  may  be  blown  except  those  of  oxen  or
calves,  in  order  not  to  remind  God  of  the  sin  of  the  golden
calf !  The  Misknahy  however,  specially  mentions  the  straight
horn  of  the  antelope  and  the  bent  horn  of  the  ram  ;  the
latter  with  special  allusion  to  the  sacrifice  in  substitution
of  Isaac,  it  being  a  tradition  that  New  Year's  Day  was  that
in   which    Abraham,   despite    Satan's   wiles    to    prevent   or

1  Maimonides,  Moreh  Nev, ,  iii.  43.  In  opposition  to  this,  Luther  annotates  as
follows  :  *'  They  were  to  blow  with  the  horn  in  order  to  call  God  and  His  wondrous
works  to  remembrance  ;  how  He  had  redeemed  them — as  it  were  to  preach  about
it,  and  to  thank  Him  for  it,  just  as  among  us  Christ  and  His  redemption  is
remembered  and  preached  by  the  Gospel ; "  to  which  the  Weimar  Glossa7y  adds  :
*'  Instead  of  the  horn  and  trumpets  we  have  bells."  See  Lundius,  Jiid.  HeUigtlu^
p.  1024,  coi.  ii.     Buxtorf  applies  Amos  iii.  16  to  the  blowing  of  the  horn.


26o       The  Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

retard  him,  had  offered  up  his  son  Isaac  on  Mount  Moriah.
The  mouthpiece  of  the  horns  for  New  Year's  Day  were  fitted
with  gold — those  used  on  fast  days  with  silver.  Another
distinction  was  this — on  New  Year's  Day  those  who  blew
the  horn  were  placed  between  others  who  blew  the  trumpets,
and  the  sound  of  the  horn  was  prolonged  beyond  that  of
the  trumpets  ;  but  on  fast  days  those  who  sounded  the
trumpets  stood  in  the  middle,  and  their  blast  was  prolonged
beyond  that  of  the  horns.  For  the  proper  obseryance  of  these
solemn  seasons,  it  was  deemed  necessary  not  only  to  hear  but
to  listen  to  the  sound  of  the  horn,  since,  as  the  Mishnah
adds,  everything  depends  on  the  intent  of  the  heart,  not
on  the  mere  outward  deed,  just  as  it  was  not  Moses  lifting
up  his  hands  that  gave  Israel  the  victory,  nor  yet  the  lifting  up
of  the  brazen  serpent  which  healed,  but  the  upturning  of  the
heart  of  Israel  to  "  their  Father  who  is  in  heaven  " — or  faith.^
We  quote  the  remark,  not  only  as  one  of  the  comparatively
few  passages  in  the  Mishnah^  which  turn  on  the  essence  of
religion,  but  as  giving  an  insight  into  the  most  ancient  views
of  the  Rabbis  on  these  types,  and  as  reminding  us  of  the
memorable  teaching  of  our  Lord  to  one  of  those  very
Rabbis.'

The  Mishnah  ^  mentions  various  "  Berachoth  "  or  "  benedic-
tions "  as  having  been  repeated  on  New  Year's  Day.  These,
with  many  others  of  later  date,  still  form  part  of  the  liturgy
in  the  synagogue  for  that  day.  But  there  is  internal  evidence
that  the  prayers,  at  any  rate  in  their  present  form,  could  not
have    been   used,   at   least,   in   the   Temple.*      Besides,   the

1  Rosh  ha  Sh.  iii.  8.  «  John  iii.  14,  15.  ^  ^osh  ha  Sh.  iv.  5,  etc.

*  From  the  text  of  Rosh  ha  Sh.  iv.   7,  it  distinctly  appears  that  they  were

intended  to  be  used  in  the  synagogues.     Of  course,  this  leaves  the  question  open.


The  New  Moons.  261

Rabbis  themselves  differ  as  to  their  exact  amount  and
contents,  and  finally  satisfy  themselves  by  indicating  that
the  titles  of  these  benedictions  are  rather  intended  as  /lead^
ings^  to  show  their  contents,  and  what  special  direction
their  prayers  had  taken.  One  set  of  them  bore  on  *'the
kingdom  ''  of  God,  and  is  accordingly  called  Malchiyoth  ;
another,  the  Sichronothy  referred  to  the  various  kinds  of
"  remembrance "  on  the  part  of  God ;  while  a  third,  called
Shopharoth,  consisted  of  benedictions,  connected  with  the
"  blowing  of  the  horn."  It  is  said  that  any  one  who  simply
repeated  ten  passages  from  Scripture — according  to  another
authority,  three — bearing  on  "  the  kingdom  of  God,"  **  the
remembrance  of  God,"  and  "the  blowing  of  horns,"  had
fulfilled  his  duty  in  regard  to  these  "  benedictions."

From  Scripture  we  know  with  what  solemnity  the  first
day  of  the  seventh  month  was  observed  at  the  time  of  Ezra,
and  how  deeply  moved  the  people  were  by  the  public  reading
and  explanation  of  the  law,  which  to  so  many  of  them  came
like  a  strange  sound,  all  the  more  solemn,  that  after  so  long
a  period  they  heard  it  again  on  that  soil,  which,  as  it  were,
bore  witness  to  its  truth.^  In  the  New  Testament  there  is
no  reference  to  our  Lord  having  ever  attended  this  feast  in
Jerusalem.  Nor  was  this  necessary,  as  it  was  equally  cele-
brated in  all  the  synagogues  of  Israel.^  Yet  there  seems
some  allusion  to  the  blowing  of  the  horn  in  the  writings
of  St.    Paul.     We  have   already  stated   that,   according   to


whether  or  not  something  like  them  was  also  said  in  the  Temple.  The  Mishnah
mentions  altogether  nine  of  these  **  benedictions."

*  Neh.  viii.  I- 1 2.

2  But  in  the  synagogues  out  of  Jerusalem,  the  A?r«,  not  trumpets,  was  blown  on
New  Year's  Day.


262       The  Temple y  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Maimonides/  one  of  its  main  purposes  was  to  rouse  men  to
repentance.  In  fact,  the  commentator  of  Maimonides  makes
use  of  the  following  words  to  denote  the  meaning  of  the  blowing
of  trumpets :  '*  Rouse  ye,  rouse  ye  from  your  slumber ;  awake,
awake  from  your  sleep,  you  who  mind  vanity,  for  slumber
most  heavy  has  fallen  upon  you.  Take  it  to  heart,  before
Whom  you  are  to  give  an  account  in  the  judgment."  May
not  some  such  formula  also  have  been  anciently  used  in  the
synagogue;^  and  may  not  the  remembrance  of  it  have  been
present  to  the  mind  of  the  apostle,  when  he  wrote  :^  "  Where-
fore it  is  said,  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the
dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light!"  If  so,  we  may
possibly  find  an  allusion  to  the  appearance  of  the  new  moon,
specially  to  that  of  the  seventh  month,  in  these  words  of  one
of  the  preceding  verses  :  *  "  For  ye  were  sometimes  darkness,
but  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord  :  walk  as  children  of  light  I "

^  Moreh  Nev. ,  iii.  c.  43.
\  Comp.  Goodwin,  Moses  et  Aaron  (ed.  Hottinger),  p.  6o]«
»  Epb.  ▼.  34.  *  Epli*  V,  S.


CHAPTER   XVI.

THE  DAY  OF  ATONEMENT.

••  But  into  the  second  (tabernacle)  went  the  high-priest  alone  once  every  year,  not
without  blood,  which  he  offered  for  himself,  and  for  the  errors  of  the  people,
....  But  Christ  being  come  an  high- priest  of  good  things  to  come  ....
by  His  own  blood  He  entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained
eternal  redemption  for  us." — Heb.  ix.  7,  il,  12,

IT  may  sound  strange,  and  yet  it  is  true,  that  the  clearest
testimony  to  *'  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness  "  "  ot
the  commandment "  is  that  given  by  "  the  commandment "
itself.  The  Levitical  arrangements  for  the  removal  of  sin
bear  on  their  forefront,  as  it  were,  this  inscription  :  "  The  law
made  nothing  perfect" — having  neither  a  perfect  mediatorship
in  the  priesthood,  nor  a  perfect  "  atonement  **  in  the  sacri-
fices, nor  yet  a  perfect  forgiveness  as  the  result  of  both,
**  For  the  law  having  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  and
not  the  very  image  of  the  things,  can  never  with  those
sacrifices  which  they  offered  year  by  year  continually  make
the  comers  thereunto  perfect."^  And  this  appears,  j'^ri'/,  from
the  continual  recurrence  and  the  multiplicity  of  these  sacri-
fices, which  are  intended  the  one  to  supplement  the  other,
and  yet  always  leave  something  to  be  still  supplemented ;

»  Heb.  X,  I.


264       The  Templey  its  Ministry  and  Services.

and,  secondly y  from  the  broad  fact  that,  in  general,  "  it  is  not
possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take
away  sins."^  It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  Levitical  dis-
pensation, being  stamped  with  imperfectness  alike  in  the
means  which  it  employed  for  the  "  taking  away  "  of  sin,  and
in  the  results  which  it  obtained  by  these  means,  declared
itself,  like  John  the  Baptist,  only  a  "  forerunner,"  the  breaker
up  and  preparer  of  the  way — not  the  satisfying,  but,  on  the
contrary,  the  calling  forth  and  "the  bringing  in  of  a  better
hope."  2

As  might  have  been  expected,  this  "  weakness  and  unpro-
fitableness of  the  commandment "  became  most  apparent
in  the  services  of  the  day  in  which  the  Old  Testament
provision  for  pardon  and  acceptance  attained,  so  to  speak,
its  climax.  On  the  "Day  of  Atonement,"  not  ordinary
priests,  but  the  high-priest  alone  officiated,  and  that  not
in  his  ordinarj^  dress,  nor  yet  in  that  of  the  ordinary
priesthood,  but  in  one  pecuhar  to  the  day,  and  peculiarly
expressive  of  purity.  The  worshippers  also  appeared  in
circumstances  different  from  those  on  any  other  occasion,
since  they  were  to  fast  and  to  "  afflict  their  souls ; "  the
day  itself  was  to  be  "  a  Sabbath  of  Sabbatism,"^  while  its
central  services  consisted  of  a  series  of  grand  expiatory
sacrifices,  unique  in  their  character,  purpose,  and  results,  as
described  in  these  words :  "  He  shall  make  an  atonement
for  the  holy  sanctuary,  and  he  shall  make  an  atonement
for  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  and  for  the  altar^
and  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  priests,  and  for
all  the  people  of  the  congregation."^     But  even  the  need  of

*  Heb.  X.  4.  '  Heb.  vii.  19 ;  see  marginal  rendering.

•  Rendered  "Sabbath  of  rest**  in  Authorised  Version.  *  Lev.  xvi.  53,


The  Day  of  Atonement.  265

such  a  "  Day  of  Atonement,"  after  the  daily  offerings,  the
various  festive  sacrifices,  and  the  private  and  public  sin-
offerings  all  the  year  round,  showed  the  insufficiency  of
all  such  sacrifices,  while  the  very  offerings  of  the  **Day  of
Atonement"  proclaimed  themselves  to  be  only  temporary
and  provisional,  "imposed  until  the  time  of  reformation/*
We  specially  allude  here  to  the  mysterious  appearance  of  the
so-called  *'  scape-goat,"  of  which  we  shall,  in  the  sequel,  have
to  give  an  account  differing  from  that  of  previous  writers.

The  names  "  Day  of  Atonement,"  or  in  the  Talmud,  which
devotes  to  it  a  special  tractate,  simply  ^^  the  day"  (perhap*^
also  in  Heb.  vii.  27^),  and  in  the  Book  of  Acts  "the  fast,*'*
sufficiently  designate  its  general  object.  It  took  place  ^n
the  loth  day  of  the  seventh  month  {Tiskri)y  that  is,  sym-
bolically, when  the  sacred  or  Sabbath  of  months  had  just
attained  its  completeness.  Nor  must  we  overlook  the  position
of  that  day  relatively  to  the  other  festivals.  The  seventh  or
sabbatical  month  closed  the  festive  cycle,  the  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles on  the  15th  of  that  month  being  the  last  in  the  year.
But,  as  already  stated,  before  that  grand  festival  of  han/esting
and  thanksgiving  Israel  must,  as  a  nation,  be  reconciled  unto
rGod,  for  only  a  people  at  peace  with  God  might  rejoice  before
Him  in  the  blessing  with  which  He  had  crowned  the  year.^
And  the  import  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,  as  preceding  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles,  becomes  only  more  striking,  when  we
remember  how  that  feast  of  harvesting  prefigured  the  final
ingathering  of  all  nations.     In  connection  with  this  point  it

*  In  that  case  we  should  translate  Heb.  vii.  27,  **  Who  needeth  not  on  each  day
(viz.,  of  atonement),  as  those  high-priests,  to  offer  up  his  sacrifices,"  etc.

*  Acts  xxvii.  9.

*  See  ch.  xiv.     So  also  Keil,  Oehler,  Kurtz,  Hupfeld,  and  almost  all  writers  on
the  subject.


266       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

may  also  be  well  to  remember  that  the  Jubilee  Year  was
always  proclaimed  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.^

In  briefly  reviewing  the  Divine  ordinances  about  this  day,*
we  find  that  only  on  that  one  day  in  every  year  the  high-
priest  was  allowed  to  go  into  the  Most  Holy  Place,  and  then
arrayed  in  a  peculiar  white  dress,  which  differed  from  that
of  the  ordinary  priests,  in  that  its  girdle  also  was  white,  and
not  of  the  Temple  colours,  while  "the  bonnet*'  was  of  the
same  shape,  though  not  the  same  material  as  "  the  mitre,*'
which  the  high-priest  ordinarily  wore.^  The  simple  white
of  his  array,  in  distinction  to  the  "golden  garments"  which
he  otherwise  wore,  pointed  to  the  fact  that  on  that  day  the
high-priest  appeared,  not  "  as  the  bridegroom  of  Jehovah,"
but  as  bearing  in  his  official  capacity  the  emblem  of  that
perfect  purity  which  was  sought  by  the  expiations  of  that
day.^  Thus  in  the  prophecies  of  Zechariah  the  removal  of
Joshua's  "  filthy  garments "  and  the  clothing  him  with
"  change  of  raiment,"  symbolically  denoted — "  I  have  caused
/thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee."^  Similarly  those  who
stand  nearest  to  God  are  always  described  as  arrayed  "  in
white." ^  And  because  these  were  emphatically  "the  holy
garments,"  "therefore"  the  high-priest  had  to  "wash  his
flesh  in  water,  and  so  put  them  on,"^  that  is,  he  was  not

^  Lev.  XXV.  9.  According  to  the  Jewish  view,  it  was  also  the  day  on  which
Adam  had  both  sinned  and  repented  ;  that  on  which  Abraham  was  circumcised  ;
and  that  on  which  Moses  returned  from  the  mount  and  made  atonement  for  the
sin  of  the  golden  calf.

*  Lev.  xvi.  ;  xxiii.  26-32  ;  Numb.  xxix.  II.
'  This  appears  from  the  Hebrew  terms.

*  According  to  Yoina,  iii.  7,  the  High  Priest  wore  in  the  morning  white
raiments  of  Felusian,  and  "  between  the  evenings"  of  Indian  stuff — respectively
valued  (no  doubt,  extravagantly)  at  about  ;^li8  and  £'](),

^  Zech,  iii,  3, 4,         •  See  Ezek.  ix.  2,  etc.  ;  Dan.  x.  5  ;  xii.  6.         ?  Lev.  xvi.  4^


The  Day  of  Atonement.  267

merely  to  wash  his  hands  and  feet,  as  before  ordinary  minis-
trations, but  to  bathe  his  whole  body.

From  Numb.  xxix.  7-1 1  it  appears  that  the  offerings  on  the
Day  of  Atonement  were  really  of  a  threefold  kind — "  the  con-
tinual burnt-offering,"  that  is,  the  daily  morning  and  evening
sacrifices,  with  their  meat  and  drink-offerings  ;  the  festive
sacrifices  of  the  day,  consisting  for  the  high-priest  and  the
priesthood,  of  "a  ram  for  a  burnt-offering,''^  and  for  the
people  of  one  young  bullock,  one  ram,  and  seven  lambs  of
the  first  year  (with  their  meat-offerings)  for  a  burnt-sacrifice,
and  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering  ;  and,  thirdly,
and  chiefly,  the  peculiar  expiatory  sacrifices  of  the  day,
which  were  a  young  bullock  as  a  sin-offermg  for  the  high-
priest,  his  house,  and  the  sons  of  Aaron,  and  another  sin-
offering  for  the  people,  consisting  of  two  goats,  one  of  which
was  to  be  killed  and  its  blood  sprinkled,  as  directed,  while  the
other  was  to  be  sent  away  into  the  wilderness,  bearing  "  all  the
iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  all  their  transgressions
in  all  their  sins  "  which  had  been  confessed  **  over  him,"  and
laid  upon  him  by  the  high-priest.  Before  proceeding  further,
we  note  the  following  as  the  order  of  these  sacrifices — first,  the
ordinary  morning  sacrifice  ;  next  the  expiatory  sacrifices  for
the  high-priest,  the  priesthood,  and  the  people  (one  bullock,
and  one  of  the  two  goats,  the  other  being  the  so-called  scape-
goat) ;  then  the  festive  burnt-offerings  of  the  priests  and  the
people,*  and  with  them  another  sin-offering ;  and,  lastly,  the
ordinary  evening  sacrifice,  being,  as  Maimonides  observes,  in  all
fifteen  sacrificial  animals.     According  to  Jewish  tradition^  the  ^

^  Lev.  xvi.  3.  *  Numb.  xxix.  7-1 1.  I

5  Special  references  would  here  be  too  numerous,  and  we  must  in  general  refer
to  Mish.  Yoma,  and  to  the  tractates  of  Maimonides  on  the  order  of  that  service,
which  latter  we  follow  very  closely.


268       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

whole  of  the  services  of  that  day  were  performed  by  the  high-
priest  himself,  of  course,  with  the  assistance  of  others,  for
which  purpose  more  than  500  priests  were  said  to  have  been
employed.^  Of  course,  if  the  Day  of  Atonement  fell  on  a
Sabbath,  besides  all  these,  the  ordinary  Sabbath  sacrifices
were  also  offered.  On  a  principle  previously  explained,  the
high-priest  purchased  from  his  own  funds  the  sacrifices
brought  for  himself  and  his  house,  the  priesthood,  however,
contributing,  in  order  to  make  them  sharers  in  the  offering,
while  the  public  sacrifices  for  the  whole  people  were  paid
for  from  the  Temple  treasury.  Only  while  officiating  in
the  distinctly  expiatory  services  of  the  day  did  the  high-
priest  wear  his  "linen  garments;"  in  all  the  others  he  was
arrayed  in  his  "golden  vestments."  This  necessitated  a
frequent  change  of  dress,  and  before  each  he  bathed  his
whole  body.  All  this  will  be  best  understood  by  a  more
detailed  account  of  the  order  of  service,  as  given  in  the
Scriptures  and  by  tradition.^

Seven  days  before  the  Day  of  Atonement  the  high-priest
left  his  own  house  in  Jerusalem,  and  took  up  his  abode  in
his  chambers  in  the  Temple.  A  substitute  was  appointed
for  him,  in  case  he  should  die  or  become  Levitically  unfit
for  his  duties.  Rabbinical  punctiliousness  went  so  far  as  to
have  him  twice  sprinkled  with  the  ashes  of  the  red  heifer —
on  the  3rd  and  the  7th  day  of  his  week  of  separation — in
case  he  had,  unwittingly  to  himself,  been  defiled  by  a  dead
body.^     During   the   whole   of  that  week,   also,   he   had   to

*  Comp.  Jost.  Gesch,  d.  yudenth.,  vol  i.  p.  164.

*  The  reader  will  readily  distinguish  what  is  derived  from  Scripture  and  what
merely  from  tradition.

'  Numb.  xix.  13.      May  not  the  "sprinkling  of  the  ashes  of  an  heifer"  in
Heb.  ix.  13  refer  to  this  ?    The  whole  section  bears  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.


The  Day  of  Atonement.  269

practise  the  various  priestly  rites,  such  as  sprinkling  the
blood,  burning  the  incense,  lighting  the  lamp,  offering  the
daily  sacrifice,  etc.  For,  as  already  stated,  every  part  of
that  day's  services  devolved  on  the  high-priest,  and  he  must
not  commit  any  mistake.  Some  of  the  elders  of  the  San-
hedrim were  appointed  to  see  to  it,  that  the  high-priest
fully  understood,  and  knew  the  meaning  of  the  service,
otherwise  they  were  to  instruct  him  in  it.  On  the  eve  of
the  Day  of  Atonement  the  various  sacrifices  were  brought
before  him,  that  there  might  be  nothing  strange  about  the
services  of  the  morrow.  Finally,  they  bound  him  by  a
solemn  oath  not  to  change  anything  in  the  rites  of  the  day.
This  was  chiefly  for  fear  of  the  Sadducean  notion,  that  the
incense  should  be  lighted  before  the  high-priest  actually
entered  into  the  Most  Holy  Place  ;  while  the  Pharisees  held
that  this  was  to  be  done  only  within  the  Most  Holy  Place
itself.^  The  evening  meal  of  the  high-priest  before  the
great  day  was  to  be  scanty.  All  night  long  he  was  to  be
hearing  and  expounding  the  Holy  Scriptures,  or  otherwise
kept  employed,  so  that  he  might  not  fall  asleep.^  At  mid-
night the  lot  was  cast  for  removing  the  ashes  and  preparing
the  altar ;  and  to  distinguish  the  Day  of  Atonement  from  all
others,  four^  instead  of  the  usual  three,  fires  were  arranged
on  the  great  altar  of  burnt-offering.

The   services  of  the   day  began  with   the .  first   streak  of
morning  light.     Already  the  people  had  been  admitted  into

^  The  only  interesting  point  here  is  the  Scriptural  argument  on  which  the  Saddu-
cees  based  their  view.  They  appealed  to  Lev.  xvi.  2,  and  explained  the  expres-
sion, **  I  will  appear  in  the  cloud  upon  the  mercy-seat,"  in  a  rationalistic  sense  as
applying  to  the  cloud  of  incense,  not  to  that  of  the  Divine  Presence,  while  the
Pharisees  appealed  to  verse  13.

•  For  special  Levitica  reason*.


2  JO     The   Temple^  its  Mmistry  and  Services.

the  sanctuary.  So  jealous  were  they  of  any  innovation
or  alteration,  that  only  a  linen  cloth  excluded  the  high-
priest  from  public  view,  when,  each  time  before  changing
his  garments,  he  bathed — not  in  the  ordinary  place  of  the
priests,  but  in  one  specially  set  apart  for  his  use.  Altogether
he  changed  his  raiments  and  washed  his  whole  body  five
times  on  that  day,^  and  his  hands  and  feet  ten  times.^  When
the  first  dawn  of  morning  was  announced  in  the  usual
manner,  the  high-priest  put  off  his  ordinary  (layman's)  dress,
bathed,  put  on  his  golden  vestments,  washed  his  hands  and
feet,  and  proceeded  to  perform  all  the  principal  parts  of  the
ordinary  morning  service.  Tradition  has  it,  that  immedi-
ately after  that,  he  offered  certain  parts  of  the  burnt-sacri-
fices for  the  day,  viz.,  the  bullock  and  the  seven  lambs,
reserving  his  own  ram  and  that  of  the  people,  as  well  as
the  sin-offering  of  a  kid  of  the  goats,^  till  after  the  special
expiatory  sacrifices  of  the  day  had  been  brought.  But  the
text  of  Lev.  xvi.  24  is  entirely  against  this  view,  and  shows
that  the  whole  of  the  burnt-offerings  and  the  festive  sin-
offering  were  brought  after  the  expiatory  services.  Con-
sidering the  relation  between  these  services  and  sacrifices,
this  might,  at  any  rate,  have  been  expected,  since  a  burnt-
offering  could  only  be  acceptable  after^  not  before,  expiation.

The  morning  service  finished,  the  high-priest  washed  his
hands  and  feet,  put  off  his  golden  vestments,  bathed,  put
on  his  "linen  garments,"  again  washed  his  hands  and  feet,
and  proceeded  to   the  peculiar   part  of  the   day's  services

^  In  case  of  age  or  infirmity,  the  bath  was  allowed  to  be  heated,  either  by  adding
warm  water,  or  by  putting  hot  irons  into  it.

*  The  high-priest  did  not  on  that  day  wash  in  the  ordinary  laver,  but  in  a  golden
vessel  specially  provided  fv^r  the  purpose.

^  Numb.  xxix.  8-1 1,


TJte  Day  of  Ato7tement.  271

The  bullock  for  his  sin-offering  stood  between  the  Temple-
porch  and  the  altan  It  was  placed  towards  the  south,  but
the  high-priest,  who  stood  facing  the  east  (that  is,  the  wor-
shippers), turned  the  head  of  the  sacrifice  towards  the  west
(that  is,  to  face  the  sanctuary).  He  then  laid  both  his
hands  upon  the  head  of  the  bullock,  and  confessed  as  fol-
lows : — ''  Ah,  Jehovah  !  I  have  committed  iniquity  ;  I  have
transgressed  ;  I  have  sinned — I  and  my  house.  Oh,  then,
Jehovah,  I  entreat  Thee,  cover  over  (atone  for,  let  there
be  atonement  for)  the  iniquities,  the  transgressions,  and  the
sins  which  I  have  committed,  transgressed,  and  sinned  before
Thee,  I  and  my  house — even  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of
Moses,  Thy  serv^ant :  '  For,  on  that  day  will  He  cover  over
(atone)  for  you  to  make  you  clean  ;  from  all  your  trans-
gressions before  Jehovah  ye  shall  be  cleansed."*  It  will
be  noticed  that  in  this  solemn  confession  the  name  Jehovah
occurred  three  times.  Other  three  times  was  it  pronounced
in  the  confession  which  the  high-priest  made  over  the  same
bullock  for  the  priesthood ;  a  seventh  time  was  it  uttered
when  he  cast  the  lot  as  to  which  of  the  two  goats  was  to
be  "for  Jehovah;"  and  once  again  he  spoke  it  three  times
in  the  confession  over  the  so-called  '^  scape-goat  '*  which  bore
the  sins  of  the  people.  All  these  ten  times  the  high-priest
pronounced  the  very  name  of  Jehovah,  and,  as  he  spoke
it,  those  who  stood  near  cast  themselves  with  their  faces  on
the  ground,  while  the  multitude  responded  :  "  Blessed  be
the  Name  ;  the  glory  of  His  kingdom  is  for  ever  and  ever."^
Formerly  it  had  been  the  practice  to  pronounce  the  so-called
*'  Ineffable  Name "  distinctly,  but  afterwards,  when  some
attempted   to   make  use  of  it  for  magical  purposes,  it  was

^  In  support  of  this  benediction,  reference  is  made  to  Deut  xxxii.  3.


272       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

spoken  with  bated  breath,  and,  as  one  relates^  who  had  stood
among  the  priests  in  the  Temple  and  listened  with  rapt
attention  to  catch  the  mysterious  name,  it  was  lost  amidst
the  sound  of  the  priests'  instruments,  as  they  accompanied
the  benediction  of  the  people.*

The  first  part  of  the  expiatory  service — that  for  the  priest-
hood— had  taken  place  close  to  the  Holy  Place,  between  the
porch  and  the  altar.  The  next  was  performed  close  to  the
worshipping  people.  In  the  eastern  part  of  the  Court  of
Priests,  that  is,  close  to  the  worshippers,  and  on  the  north  side
of  it,  stood  an  urn,  called  Calpi,  in  which  were  two  lots  of  the
same  shape,  size,  and  material — in  the  second  Temple  they
were  of  gold  ;  the  one  bearing  the  inscription  "la-jEHOVAH,"
for  Jehovah,  the  other  "  la-Azazel,"  for  Azazel,  leaving  the
expression^  (rendered  "  scape-goat  *'  in  the  Authorised  Version)
for  the  present  untranslated.  These  two  goats  had  been
placed  with  their  backs  to  the  people  and  their  faces  towards
the  sanctuary  (westwards).  The  high-priest  now  faced  the
people,  as,  standing  between  his  substitute  (at  his  right  hand)
and  the  head  of  the  course  on  ministry  (on  his  left  hand),  he
shook  the  urn,  thrust  his  two  hands  into  it,  and  at  the  same
time  drew  the  two  lots,  laying  one  on  the  head  of  each  goat.
Popularly  it  was  deemed  of  good  augury  if  the  right-hand  lot
had  fallen  **  for  Jehovah."  The  two  goats,  however,  must  be
altogether  alike  in  look,  size,  and  value ;  indeed,  so  earnestly
was  it  sought  to  carry  out  the  idea  that  these  two  formed  parts

*  Rabbi  Tryphon  in  the  yerus.  Taint,  Possibly  some  readers  may  not  know
that  the  Jews  never  pronounce  the  word  Jehovahy  but  always  substitute  for  it
*'Lord"  (printed  in  capitals  in  the  Authorised  Version).  Indeed,  the  right  pro-
nunciation of  the  word  has  been  lost,  and  is  matter  of  dispute,  all  that  we  have  in
the  Hebrew  being  the  letters  /.  H,  V,  H, — forming  the  so-called  tetragrammaton^
w  **fouj-lettered  word.'*  *  Lev,  xvi.  8,  10,  26,


The  Day  of  Atonement.  27^

of  one  and  the  same  sacrifice,  that  it  was  arranged  they  should,
if  possible,  even  be  purchased  at  the  same  time.  The  import-
ance of  this  view  will  afterwards  be  explained.  The  lot  having
designated  each  of  the  two  goats,  the  high-priest  tied  a  tongue-
shaped  piece  of  scarlet  cloth  to  the  horn  of  the  goat  for  Azazel
— the  so-called  "  scape-goat " — and  another  round  the  throat
of  the  goat  for  Jehovah,  which  was  to  be  slain.  The  goat  that
was  to  be  sent  forth  was  now  turned  round  towards  the  people,
and  stood  facing  them,  waiting,  as  it  were,  till  their  sins  should
be  laid  on  him,  and  he  would  carry  them  forth  into  "  a  land
not  inhabited."  Assuredly  a  more  marked  type  of  Christ
could  not  be  conceived,  as  He  was  brought  forth  by  Pilate  and
stood  before  the  people,  just  as  He  was  about  to  be  led  forth,
bearing  the  iniquity  of  the  people.  And,  as  if  to  add  to  the
significance  of  the  rite,  tradition  has  it  that  when  the  sacrifice
was  fully  accepted  the  scarlet  mark  which  the  scape-goat  had
borne  became  white,  to  symbolise  the  gracious  promise  in
Isa.  i.  18  ;  but  it  adds  that  this  miracle  did  not  take  place  for
forty  years  before  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  !

With  this  presentation  of  the  scape-goat  before  the  people
commenced  the  third  and  most  solemn  part  of  the  expiatory
services  of  the  day.  The  high-priest  now  once  more  returned
towards  the  sanctuary,  and  a  second  time  laid  his  two  hands
on  the  bullock,  which  still  stood  between  the  porch  and  the
altar,  to  confess  over  him,  not  only  as  before,  his  own  and  his
household's  sins,  but  also  those  of  the  priesthood.  The  form*
ula  used  was  precisely  the  same  as  before,  with  the  addition
of  the  words,  "  the  seed  of  Aaron,  Thy  holy  people,"  both  in
the  confession  and  in  the  petition  for  atonement.  Then  the
high-priest  killed  the  bullock,  caught  up  his  blood  in  a  vessel,
and  gave  it  to  an  attendant  to  keep  it  stirring,  lest  it  should

T


274       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

coagulate.  Advancing  to  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  he  rext
filled  the  censer  with  burning  coals,  and  then  ranged  a  handful  of
frankincense  in  the  dish  destined  to  hold  it.  Ordinarily,  every-
thing brought  in  actual  ministry  unto  God  must  be  carried  in
the  right  hand — hence  the  incense  in  the  right  and  the  censer
in  the  left.  But  on  this  occasion,  as  the  censer  for  the  Day  of
Atonement  was  larger  and  heavier  than  usual,  the  high-priest
was  allowed  to  reverse  the  common  order.  Every  eye  was
strained  towards  the  sanctuary  as,  slowly  bearing  the  censer
and  the  incense,  the  figure  of  the  white-robed  high-priest  was
seen  to  disappear  within  the  Holy  Place.  After  that  nothing
further  could  be  seen  of  his  movements.  The  curtain  of  the
Most  Holy  Place  was  folded  back,  and  the  high-priest  stood
alone  and  separated  from  all  the  people  in  the  awful  gloom  of
the  Holiest  of  All,  only  lit  up  by  the  red  glow  of  the  coals  in
the  priest's  censer.  In  the  first  Temple  the  ark  of  God  had
stood  there  with  the  "  mercy-seat "  overshadowing  it ;  above  it^
the  visible  presence  of  Jehovah  in  the  cloud  of  the  Shechinah^
and  on  either  side  the  outspread  wings  of  the  cherubim  ;  and
the  high-priest  had  placed  the  censer  between  the  staves  of  the
ark.  But  in  the  Temple  of  Herod  there  was  neither  Shechu
nah  nor  ark — all  was  empty ;  and  the  high-priest  rested  his
censer  on  a  large  stone,  called  the  ''foundation-stone."^  He
now  most  carefully  emptied  the  incense  into  his  hand,  and
threw  it  on  the  coals  of  the  censer,  as  far  from  himself  as  pos-
sible, and  so  waited  till  the  smoke  had  filled  the  Most  Holy
Place.  Then,  retreating  backwards,  he  prayed  outside  the  veil
as  follows '?  ''  May  it  please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  and  the

*  There  is  no  need  for  here  entering  on  the  legends  connected  with  this  so-calJed
**  foundation-stone. "

*  We  give  the  prayer  in  its  simplest  form  from  the  Talmud.     But  we  cannot
help  feeling  that  its  form  savours  of  later  than  Temple- times.     Probably  only  its


The  Day  of  Atonement.  275

God  of  our  fathers,  that  neither  this  day  nor  during  this  year
any  captivity  come  upon  us.     Yet,  if  captivity  befall  us  this
day  or  this  year,  let  it  be  to -a  place  where  the  law  is  culti-
vated.    May  it  please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  and  the  God  of
our  fathers,  that  want  come  not  upon  us,  either  this  day  or  this
year.     But  if  want  visit  us  this  day  or  this  year,  let  it  be  due
to  the  liberality  of  our  charitable  deeds.     May  it  please  Thee,
O  Lord  our  God,  and  the  God  of  our  fathers,  that  this  year
may  be  a  year  of  cheapness,  of  fulness,  of  intercourse  and
trade ;  a  year  with  abundance  of  rain,  of  sunshine,  and  of
dew ;  one  in  which  Thy  people  Israel  shall  not  require  assist-
ance one  from  another.     And  listen  not  to  the  prayers  of  those
who  are  about  to  set  out  on  a  journey.^     And  as  to  Thy  people
Israel,  may  no  enemy  exalt  himself  against  them.     May  it
please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  and  the  God  of  our  fathers,
that  the  houses  of  the  men  of  Saron  may  not  become  their
graves."^     The  high-priest  was  not  to  prolong  this  prayer,  lest
his  protracted  absence  might  fill  the  people  with  fears  for  his
safety.     While   the  incense  was  offering  in  the  Most  Holy
Place  the  people  withdrew  from  proximity  to   it,  and  wor-
shipped in  silence.      At  last  the  people  saw  the  high-priest
emerging  from  the  sanctuary,  and  they  knew  that  the  service
had  been  accepted.     Rapidly  he  took  from  the  attendant,  who
had  kept  it  stirring,  the  blood  of  the  bullock.     Once  more  he
entered   into  the  Most  Holy  Place,  and  sprinkled  with  his
finger  once  upwards,  towards  where  the  mercy-seat  had  been^

substance  dates  from  those  days,  and  each  high-priest  may  have  been  at  liberty  to
formulate  it  according  to  his  own  views.

1  W^ho  might  pray  against  the  fall  of  rain.     It  must  be  remembered  that  the
autumn  rains,  on  which  the  fruitfulness  of  the  land  depended,  were  just  due.

2  This  on  account  of  the  situation  of  that  valley,  which  was  threatened  either  hf
sudden  floods  or  by  dangerous  landslips.


276       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

and  seven  times  downwards,  counting  as  he  did  so  :  "  Once  "
(upwards),  "  once  and  once  "  (downwards),  '*  once  and  twice/'
and  so  on  to  *'  once  and  seven  times,''  always  repeating  the
word  **  once,"  which  referred  to  the  upwards  sprinkling,  so  as  to
prevent  any  mistake.  Coming  out  from  the  Most  Holy  Place,
the  high-priest  now  deposited  the  bowl  with  the  blood  before
the  veil.  Then  he  killed  the  goat  set  apart  for  Jehovah,  and,
entering  the  Most  Holy  Place  a  third  time,  sprinkled  as  before,
once  upwards  and  seven  times  downwards,  and  again  deposited
the  bowl  with  the  blood  of  the  goat  on  a  second  golden  stand
before  the  veil.  Taking  up  the  bowl  with  the  bullock's  blood,
he  next  sprinkled  once  upwards  and  seven  times  downwards
towards  the  veil,  outside  the  Most  Holy  Place,  and  then  did
the  same  with  the  blood  of  the  goat.  Finally,  pouring  the
blood  of  the  bullock  into  the  bowl  which  contained  that  of  the
goat,  and  again  the  mixture  of  the  two  into  that  which  had
held  the  blood  of  the  bullock,  so  as  thoroughly  to  commingle
the  two,  he  sprinkled  each  of  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  incense,
and  then,  making  a  clear  place  on  the  altar,  seven  times  the
top  of  the  altar  of  incense.  Thus  he  had  sprinkled  forty-
three  times  with  the  expiatory  blood,  taking  care  that  his  own
dress  should  never  be  spotted  with  the  sin-laden  blood.  What
was  left  of  the  blood  the  high-priest  poured  out  on  the  west
side  of  the  base  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering.

By  these  expiatory  sprinklings  the  high-priest  had  cleansed
the  sanctuary  in  all  its  parts  from  the  defilement  of  the  priest-
hood and  the  worshippers.  The  Most  Holy  Place,  the  veil,
the  Holy  Place,  the  altar  of  incense,  and  the  altar  of  burnt-
offering  were  now  clean  alike,  so  far  as  the  priesthood  and  as
the  people  were  concerned  ;  and  in  their  relationship  to  the  sanc-
tuary both  priests  and  worshippers  were  atoned  for.     So  far  as


The  Day  of  Atonement.  277

the  law  could  give  it,  there  was  now  again  free  access  for  all  ;  or,
to  put  it  otherwise,  the  continuance  of  typical  sacrificial  com-
munion with  God  was  once  more  restored  and  secured.  Had  it
not  been  for  these  services,  it  would  have  become  impossible
for  priests  and  people  to  offer  sacrifices,  and  so  to  obtain  the
forgiveness  of  sins,  or  to  have  fellowship  with  God.  But  the
consciences  were  not  yet  free  from  a  sense  of  personal  guilt  and
sin.  That  remained  to  be  done  through  the  ''  scape-goat."  All
this  seems  clearly  implied  in  the  distinctions  made  in  Lev.
xvi.  33  :  "And  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy  sanc-
tuary, and  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  tabernacle  of
the  congregation,  and  for  the  altar,  and  he  shall  make  an
atonement  for  the  priests,  and  for  all  the  people  of  the  con-
gregation."

Most  solemn  as  the  services  had  hitherto  been,  the  wor-
shippers would  chiefly  think  with  awe  of  the  high-priest
going  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  coming  out  thence
alive,  and  securing  for  them  by  the  blood  the  continuance  of
the  Old  Testament  privileges  of  sacrifices  and  of  access  unto
God  through  them.  What  now  took  place  concerned  them,
if  possible,  even  more  nearly.  Their  own  personal  guilt  and
sins  were  now  to  be  removed  from  them,  and  that  in  a  sym-
bolical rite,  at  one  and  the  same  time  the  most  mysterious
and  the  most  significant  of  all.  All  this  while  the  "  scape-
goat," with  the  "scarlet-tongue,"  telling  of  the  guilt  it  was
to  bear,  had  stood  looking  eastwards,  confronting  the  people,
and  waiting  for  the  terrible  load  which  it  was  to  carry  away
"unto  a  land  not  inhabited."  Laying  both  his  hands  on  the
head  of  this  goat,  the  high-priest  now  confessed  and  pleaded  :
"  Ah,  Jehovah  !  they  have  committed  iniquity ;  they  have
transgressed;  they  have  sinned — Thy  people,  the  house    of


'278        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Israel.  Oh,  then,  JEHOVAH  !  cover  over  (atone  for),  I  intreat
Thee,  upon  their  iniquities,  their  transgressions,  and  their
sins,  which  they  have  wickedly  committed,  transgressed,  and
sinned  before  Thee — Thy  people,  the  house  of  Israel.  As  it  is
written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  Thy  servant,  saying :  *  For  on
that  day  shall  it  be  covered  over  (atoned)  for  you,  to  make
you  clean  from  all  your  sins  before  JEHOVAH  ye  shall  be
cleansed/  "  And  while  the  prostrate  multitude  worshipped
at  the  name  of  Jehovah,  the  high-priest  turned  his  face  towards
them  as  he  uttered  the  last  words,  "  Ye  shall  be  cleansed  !  "  as
if  to  declare  to  them  the  absolution  and  remission  of  their  sins.
Then  a  strange  scene  would  be  witnessed.  The  priests
led  the  sin-burdened  goat  out  through  "  Solomon's  Porch,'*
and,  as  tradition  has  it,  through  the  eastern  gate,  which
opened  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives.i  Here  an  arched  bridge
spanned  the  intervening  valley,  and  over  it  they  brought  the
goat  to  the  Mount  of  Olives,  where  one,  specially  appointed
for  the  purpose,  took  him  in  charge.  Tradition  enjoins
that  he  should  be  a  stranger,  a  non-Israelite,  as  if  to  make
still  more  striking  the  type  of  Him  who  was  delivered
over  by  Israel  unto  the  Gentiles  !  Scripture  tells  us  no  more
of  the  destiny  of  the  goat  that  bore  upon  him  all  the  iniqui-
ties of  the  children  of  Israel,  than  that  they  "  shall  send
him  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man  into  the  wilderness,''  and
that  "  he  shall  let  go  the  goat  in  the  wilderness."'^  But  tradition
supplements  this  information.  The  distance  between  Jeru-
salem and  the  beginning  of  "  the  wilderness  "  is  computed
at  ninety  stadia,  making  precisely  ten  intervals,  each  half  a
Sabbath-day's  journey  from  the  other.  At  the  end  of  each
these  intervals  there  was  a  station,  occupied  by  one  or  more

*  The  Talmud  has  it,  that  the  foreign  Jews  present  used  to  burst  into  words  and
deeds  of  impatience,  that  the  "  sin-bearer"  might  be  gone.  *  Lev.  xvi.  22.


The  Day  of  Atonement.  279

persons,  detailed  for  the  purpose,  who  offered  refreshment  to
the  man  leading  the  goat,  and  then  accompanied  him  to  the
next  station.  By  this  arrangement  two  results  were  secured :
some  trusted  persons  accompanied  the  goat  all  along  his
journey,  and  yet  none  of  them  walked  more  than  a  Sabbath-
day's  journey — that  is,  half  a  journey  going  and  the  other  half
returning.  At  last  they  reached  the  edge  of  the  wilderness.
Here  they  halted,  viewing  afar  off,  while  the  man  led  forward
the  goat,  tore  off  half  the  "scarlet-tongue,"  and  stuck  it  on  a,
projecting  cliff;  then,  leading  the  animal  backwards,  he  pushed
it  over  the  projecting  ledge  of  rock.  There  was  a  moment's
pause,  and  the  man,  now  defiled  by  contact  with  the  sin-
bearer,  retraced  his  steps  to  the  last  of  the  ten  stations,  where
he  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  and  the  night.  But  the  arrival
of  the  goat  in  the  wilderness  was  immediately  telegraphed,  by
the  waving  of  flags,  from  station  to  station,  till,  a  few  minutes
after  its  occurrence,  it  was  known  in  the  Temple,  and  whispered
from  ear  to  ear,  that  "  the  goat  had  borne  upon  him  all  their
iniquities  into  a  land  not  inhabited."

What  then  was  the  meaning  of  a  rite  on  which  such  momem
tous  issue  depended  }  Everything  about  it  seems  strange  and
mysterious — the  lot  that  designated  it,  and  that  "to  Azazel  ;*'
the  fact,  that  though  the  highest  of  all  sin-offerings,  it  was
^neither  sacrificed  nor  its  blood  sprinkled  in  the  Temple;
and  the  circumstance  that  it  really  was  only  part  of  a  sacri-
fice— the  two  goats  together  forming  one  sacrifice,  one  of
them  being  killed,  and  the  other  "  let  go,''  there  being  no
other  analogous  case  of  the  kind  except  at  the  purification  of
a  leper,  when  one  bird  was  killed  and  the  other  dipped  in  its
blood,  and  let  go  free.  Thus  these  two  sacrifices — one  in  the
removal  of  what    symbolically   represented    indwelling  sin.


28o       The  Temple,  its  Alinistry  and  Services.

*:he  other  contracted  guilt — agreed  in  requiring  two  animals,
of  whom  one  was  killed,  the  other  "  let  giV*  This  is  not  the
place  to  discuss  the  various  views  entertained  of  the  import  of
the  scape-goat.^  But  it  is  destructive  of  one  and  all  of  the
received  interpretations,  that  the  sins  of  the  people  were  con-
fessed not  on  the  goat  which  was  killed,  but  on  that  which
was  "  let  go  in  the  wilderness,"  and  that  it  v/as  this  goat — not
the  other — which  "bore  upon  him  all  the  iniquities'*  of  the
people.  So  far  as  the  conscience  was  concerned  this  goat
was  the  real  and  the  only  sin-offering  "  for  all  the  iniquities  of
the  children  of  Israel,  and  all  their  transgressions  in  all  their
sins,"  for  upon  it  the  high-priest  laid  the  sins  of  the  people,  after
he  had  by  the  blood  of  the  bullock  and  of  the  other  goat  **  made
an  end  of  reconciling  the  Holy  Place,  and  the  tabernacle  of  the
congregation,  and  the  altar."  ^  The  blood  sprinkled  had  effected
this ;  but  it  had  done  no  more,  and  it  could  do  no  more,  for
it  "could  not  make  him  that  did  the  service  perfect,  as  per-
taining to  the  conscience."^  The  symbolical  representation
of  this  perfecting  was  by  the  live  goat,  which,  laden  with  the
confessed  sins  of  the  people,  carried  them  away  into  ''the
wilderness"  to  "a  land  not  inhabited."  The  only  meaning
of  which  this  seems  really  capable,  is  that  though  confessed
guilt  was  removed  from  the  people  to  the  head  of  the  goat,  as
the  symbolical  substitute,  yet  as  the  goat  was  not  killed,  only
sent  far  away,  into  "  a  land  not  inhabited,"  so,  under  the  Old'
Covenant,  sin  was  not  really  blotted  out,  only  put  away  from
the  people,  and  put  aside  till  Christ  came,  not  only  to  take
upon    Himself  the   burden  of  transgression,  but  to  blot  it  out

*  For  a  full  discussion,  we  must  refer  to  works  on  Biblical  Antiquities  ax^
on  the-  Types  of  the  Old  Testament.

*  Lev  xvL  2a  *  Heb.  ix.  9,


The  Day  of  Atonement.  281

and  to  purge  it  away}  Thus  viewed,  not  only  the  text  of
Lev.  xvi.,  but  the  language  of  Heb.  ix.  and  x.,  which  chiefly
refer  to  the  Day  of  Atonement,  becomes  plain.  The  "  blood,"
both  of  the  bullock  and  of  the  goat  which  the  high-priest
carried  "  once  a  year  "  within  "  the  sacred  veil,"  was  "  offered
for  himself  (including  the  priesthood)  and  for  the  errors
(or  rather  ignorances)  of  the  people."  In  the  language  of
Lev.  xvi.  20,  it  reconciled  ''the  Holy  Place,  and  the  tabernacle
of  the  congregation,  and  the  altar,"  that  is,  as  already  ex-
plained, it  rendered  on  the  part  of  priests  and  people  the  con-
tinuance of  sacrificial  worship  possible.  But  this  live  scape-goat
"let  go"  in  the  wilderness,  over  which,  in  the  exhaustive
language  of  Lev.  xvi.  21,  the  high-priest  had  confessed  and  on
which  he  had  laid  "  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel,
and  all  their  transgressions  in  all  their  sins,"  meant  something
quite  different.  It  meant  the  inherent  '*  weakness  and  un-
profitableness of  the  commandment;"  it  meant,  that  "the
law  made  nothing  perfect,  but  was  the  bringing  in  of  a  better
hope  ; ''  that  in  the  covenant  mercy  of  God  guilt  and  sin  were
indeed  removed  from  the  people,  that  they  were  "covered  up,"
and  in  that  sense  atoned  for,  or  rather  that  they  were  both
"covered  up"  and  removed,  but  that  they  were  not  really
taken  away  and  destroyed  till  Christ  came ;  that  they  were
only  taken  into  a  land  not  inhabited,  till  He  should  blot  it
out  by  His  own  blood ;  that  the  provision  which  the  Old
Testament  made  was  only  preparatory  and  temporary,  until
*' the  time  of  the  reformation  ;"  and  that  hence  real  and  true
forgiveness  of  sins,  and  with  it  the  spirit  of  adoption,  could  only
be  finally  obtained  after  the  death  and  resurrection  of  "the
Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."    Thus

*  May  there  be  here  also  a  reference  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  descent  into  Hades  f


2S2       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

in  the  fullest  sense  it  was  true  of  the  "  fathers,"  that ''  these  all
.  .  .  received  not  the  promise  :  God  having  provided  some  better
thing  for  us,  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect."
For  "the  law  having  a  shadow  of  the  good  things  to  come,"
could  not  ''make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect ;"  nor  yet  was
it  possible  "  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take
away  sins."  The  live  goat  *4et  go"  was  every  year  a  remover  of
sins  which  yet  were  never  really  removed  in  the  sense  of  being
blotted  out — only  deposited,  as  it  were,  and  reserved  till  He
came  ''  whom  God  hath  set  forth  as  a  propitiation  ....  because
of  the  passing  over  of  the  former  sins,  in  the  forbearance
of  God."^  ''And  for  this  cause  He  is  the  mediator  of  a  new
covenant,  in  order  that,  death  having  taken  place  for  the
propitiation  of  the  transgressions  under  the  first  covenant,
they  which  have  been  called  may  receive  the  promise  of  the
eternal  inheritance."^

This  is  not  the  place  for  following  the  argument  further.
Once  understood,  many  passages  will  recur  which  manifest  how
the  Old  Testament  removal  of  sin  was  shown  in  the  law
itself  to  have  been  complete  indeed,  so  far  as  the  individual
was  concerned,  but  not  really  and  in  reference  to  God,  till
He  came  to  Whom  as  the  reality  these  types  pointed,  and
Who  "  now  once  at  the  end  of  the  world  hath  been  mani-
fested to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself."^  And
thus  did  the  types  themselves  prove  their  own  inadequacy
and  insufficiency,  showing  that  they  had  only  "a  shadow
of  the  good  things  to  come,  and  not  the  very  image  of  the
things   themselves."*     With   this   also   agree   the   terms   by

*  Rom.  iii.  25.  We  have  generally  adopted  the  rendering  of  Dean  Alford,
where  the  reader  will  perceive  any  divergence  from  the  Authorised  Version.

•  Heb.  ix.  15.  3  Heb.  ix.  26.  *  Heb.  x.  i.


The  Day  of  Atonement.  283

which  in  the  Old  Testament  atonement  is  designated  as  a
"  covering  up "  by  a  substitute,  and  the  mercy-seat  as  "  the
place  of  covering  over."

After  this  it  is  comparatively  of  secondary  importance  to
discuss,  so  far  as  we  can  in  these  pages,  the  question  of  the
meaning  of  the  term  **  la-Azazel."^  Both  the  interpretation
which  makes  it  a  designation  of  the  goat  itself  (as  "  scape-
goat ''  in  our  Authorised  Version),  and  that  which  would
refer  it  to  a  certain  locality  in  the  wilderness^  being,  on  many
grounds,  wholly  untenable,  two  other  views  remain,  one  of
which  regards  Azazel  2l^  a  person,  and  denoting  Satan  ;  while
the  other  would  render  the  term  by  "complete  removal."
The  insurmountable  difficulties  connected  with  the  first
of  these  notions  lie  on  the  surface.  In  reference  to  the
second,  it  may  be  said  that  it  not  only  does  violence  to
Hebrew  grammar,  but  implies  that  the  goat  which  was  to
be  for  "  complete  removal  "  was  not  even  to  be  sacrificed  but
actually  "let  go!"  Besides,  what  in  that  case  could  be  the
object  of  the  first  goat  which  was  killed,  and  whose  blood
was  sprinkled  in  the  Most  Holy  Place  ?  We  may  here  at
once  state,  that  the  later  Jewish  practice  of  pushing  the
goat  over  a  rocky  precipice  was  undoubtedly  an  innovation^
in  no  wise  sanctioned  by  the  law  of  Moses,  and  not  even
introduced  at  the  time  the  Septuagint  translation  was  made,
as  its  rendering  of  Lev.  xvi.  26  shows.  The  law  simply
ordained  that  the  goat,  once  arrived  in  "the  land  not
inhabited,"  was  to  be  "  let  go  "  free,  and  the  Jewish  ordinance
of  having  it  pushed  over  the  rocks  is  signally  characteristic
of  the  Rabbinical  perversion  of  its  spiritual  type.  The  word
Azazely  which  only  occurs  in  Lev.  xvi.,  is  by  universal  consent

I  Lev.  xvi.  8,  lo,  26.

*  Thus  the  book  Sift-a  paraphrases  it :  "a  rough  place  in  the  mountains.'*


284       The  TemplCy  its  Mmistry  and  Services.

derived  from  a  root  which  means  "  wholly  to  put  aside,"  or,
** wholly  to  go  away."  Whether,  therefore,  we  render  "la-
Azazel  *'  by  '*  for  him  who  is  wholly  put  aside,"  that  is,  the
sin-bearing  Christ,  or  "  for  being  wholly  separated,*'  or  "  put
wholly  aside  or  away,"  the  truth  is  still  the  same,  as  pointing
through  the  temporary  and  provisional  removal  of  sin  by  the
goat  ''  let  go  "  in  "  the  land  not  inhabited,"  to  the  final,  real,
and  complete  removal  of  sin  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  we
read  it  in  Isa.  liii.  6,  "  Jehovah  hath  made  the  iniquities  of  us
all  to  meet  on  Him."

While  the  scape-goat  was  being  led  into  the  wilderness,  the
high-priest  proceeded  to  cut  up  the  bullock  and  the  goat  with
whose  blood  he  had  previously  "  made  atonement,"  put  the
"  inwards  "  in  a  vessel  which  he  committed  to  an  attendant,^
and  sent  the  carcasses  to  be  burnt  "outside  the  city,"  in  the
place  where  the  Temple  ashes  were  usually  deposited.  Then,
according  to  tradition,  the  high-priest,  still  wearing  the  linen
garments,^  went  into  the  "  Court  of  the  Women  "  and  read
the  passages  of  Scripture  bearing  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,
viz.,  Lev.  xvi. ;  xxiii.  27-32  ;  also  repeating  by  heart^  Numb.
xxix.  7-1 1.  A  series  of  prayers  accompanied  this  reading
of  the  Scriptures.  The  most  interesting  of  these  supplica-
tions may  be  thus  summed  up  : — Confession  of  sin  with
prayer  for  forgiveness,  closing  with  the  words,  ^^  Praise  be
to  Thee^  0  Lordy  Who  in  Thy  mercy  forgivest  tJie  sins  of  Thy
people  Israel ;''  prayer  for  the  permanence  of  the  Temple,  and
that   the  Divine  Majesty  might  shine  in  it,  closing  with —

^  Lightfoot  \JDe  MinisL  Templi)  erroneously  states  that  the  high-priest  immedi-
ately burnt  them.

2  But  this  was  not  strictly  necessary  ;  he  might  in  this  part  of  the  service  have
even  officiated  in  his  ordinary  layman's  dress.

'  Maimonides  gives  a  cmiuus  Rabbinical  reason  for  this.


The  Day  of  Atonement.  285

^^ Praise  be  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  Who  hthabitest  Zion ;'''  prayer
for  the  establishment  and  safety  of  Israel,  and  the  con-
tinuance of  a  king  among  them,  closing — ''  Thanks  be  to  Thee^
O  Lordy  Who  hast  chosen  Israel ;  "  prayer  for  the  priesthood,
that  all  their  doings,  but  especially  their  sacred  services,
might  be  acceptable  unto  God,  and  He  be  gracious  unto
them,  closing  with — "  Thanks  be  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  Who  hast
sanctified  the  priesthood ; "  and,  finally  (in  the  language  of
Maimonide^,  prayers,  entreaties,  hymns,  and  petitions  of  the
high-priest's  own,  closing  with  the  words :  "  Give  help,  O
Lord,  to  Thy  people  Israel,  for  Thy  people  needeth  help  ;  thanks
be  unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  Wha hearest prayer!'^

These  prayers  ended,  the  high-priest  washed  his  hands  and
feet,  put  off  his  "  linen,''  and  put  on  his  "  golden  vestments,"
and  once  more  washed  hands  and  feet  before  proceeding  to
the  next  ministry.  He  now  appeared  again  before  the  people
as  the  Lord's  anointed  in  the  golden  garments  of  the  bride-
chamber.  Before  he  offered  the  festive  burnt-ofiferings  of  the
day,  he  sacrificed  "one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering," ^
probably  with  special  reference  to  these  festive  services,
which,  like  everything  else,  required  atoning  blood  for  their
acceptance.  The  flesh  of  this  sin-ofifering  was  eaten  at  night
by  the  priests  within  the  sanctuary.  Next,  he  sacrificed  the
burnt-offerings  for  the  people  and  that  for  himself,^  and
finally  burned  the  "  inwards  '*  of  the  expiatory  offerings,
whose  blood  had  formerly  been  sprinkled  in  the  Most  Holy
Place.  This,  properly  speaking,  finished  the  services  of  the
day.      But   the   high-priest   had   yet   to   offer   the   ordinary

^  In  regard  to  these  prayers  we  refer  the  reader  to  our  remarks  in  a  previous
chapter.  The  view  there  expressed  about  the  wording  of  the  prayers  holds  also
good  in  regard  to  those  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.

*  Numb.  xxix.  1 6.  ^  One  ram,  Lev.  xvi.  3,


286        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

evening  sacrifice,  after  which  he  washed  his  hands  and  his
feet,  once  more  put  off  his  **  golden  "  and  put  on  his  "  linen
garments,"  and  again  washed  his  hands  and  feet.  This
before  entering  the  Most  Holy  Place  a  fourth  time  on  that
day,^  to  fetch  from  it  the  censer  and  incense-dish  which  he
had  left  there.  On  his  return  he  washed  once  more  hands
and  feet,  put  off  his  linen  garments,  which  were  never  to  be
used  again,  put  on  his  golden  vestments,  washed  hands  and
feet,  burnt  the  evening  incense  on  the  golden  altar,  lit  the
lamps  on  the  candlestick  for  the  night,  washed  his  hands
and  feet,  put  on  his  ordinary  layman's  dress,  and  was  escorted
by  the  people  in  procession  to  his  own  house  in  Jerusalem.
The  evening  closed  with  a  feast

If  this  ending  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  seems  incongru-
ous, the  Mishnah  records^  something  yet  more  strange  in
connection  with  the  day  itself.  It  is  said  that  on  the  after-
noon of  the  15  th  of  Ab,  when  the  collection  of  wood  for  the
sanctuary  was  completed,  and  on  that  of  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment, the  maidens  of  Jerusalem  went  in  white  garments,
specially  lent  them  for  the  purpose,  so  that  rich  and  poor
might  be  on  an  equality,  into  the  vineyards  close  to  the
city,  where  they  danced  and  sung.  The  following  fragment
of  one  of  their  songs  has  been  preserved  :^

"  Around  in  circle  gay,  the  Hebrew  maidens  see ;
From  them  our  happy  youths  their  partners  choose.
Remember  I     Beauty  soon  its  charm  must  lose —
And  seek  to  win  a  maid  of  fair  degree.


1  Heb.  ix.  7  states  that  the  high-priest  went  **once  in  every  year,"  that  is^
on  one  day  in  every  year,  not  on  one  occasion  during  that  day.

s   Taan.  iv.  8.

3  The  Talmud  repeatedly  states  the  fact  and  gives  the  song.  Nevertheless  we
have  some  doubt  on  the  subject,  though  the  reporter  in  the  Mishnah  is  said  to  be
none  oUier  than  Rabbi  Simeon,  the  son  of  Gamaliel,  Paul's  teacher.


The  Day  of  Atonement.  287

•*  \Vhen  fading  grace  and  beauty  low  are  laid,

Then  praise  shall  her  who  fears  the  Lord  await;
God  does  bless  her  handiwork — and,  in  the  gate,
'Her  works  do  follow  her,'  it  shall  be  said."

We  will  not  here  undertake  the  melancholy  task  of  describ-
ing what  the  modern  synagogue  has  made  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment, nor  how  it  observes  the  occasion — chiefly  in  view  of
their  gloomy  thoughts,  that  on  that  day  man's  fate  for  the
year,  if  not  his  life  or  death,  is  finally  fixed.  But  even  the
Miskftah  already  contains  similar  perverted  notions  of  how
the  day  should  be  kept,  and  what  may  be  expected  from
its  right  observance.^  Rigorous  rest  and  rigorous  fasting
are  enjoined  from  sundown  of  one  day  to  the  appearance
of  the  first  stars  on  the  next.  Neither  food  nor  drink  of
any  kind  may  be  tasted ;  a  man  may  not  even  wash,  nor
anoint  himself,  nor  put  on  his  sandals.^  The  sole  exception
made  is  in  favour  of  the  sick  and  of  children,  who  are  only
bound  to  the  full  fast — girls  at  the  age  of  twelve  years  and
one  day,  and  boys  at  that  of  thirteen  years  and  one  day,
though  it  is  recommended  to  train  them  earlier  to  it.^  In
return  for  all  this  "affliction"  Israel  may  expect  thdX  deatk
alo7ig  with  the  Day  of  Atonement  will  finally  blot  out  all  sins  !
That  is  all — the  Day  of  Atonement  and  our  own  death !
Such  are  Israel's  highest  hopes  of  expiation  !  It  is  unspeak-
ably saddening  to  follow  this  subject  further  through  the
minuticB  of   Rabbinical   ingenuity — how   much   exactly   the

*  Mish,  Voma  vin,

'  Only  woollen  socks  are  to  be  used — the  only  exception  is,  where  there  'is  fear
of  serpents  or  scorpions.

3  Kings  and  brides  within  thirty  days  of  their  wedding  are  allowed  to  wash  the>
faces  ;  the  use  of  a  towel  which  has  been  dipped  the  previous  day  in  water  is  also
conceded.


5RS       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

Day  of  Atonement  will  do  for  a  man  ;  what  proportion  of
his  sins  it  will  remit  and  what  merely  suspend  ;  how  much
is  left  over  for  after-chastisements,  and  how  much  for  final
extinction  at  death.  The  law  knows  nothing  of  such  miser-
able petty  misrepresentations  of  the  free  pardon  of  God.
In  the  expiatory  sacrifices  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  every
kind^  of  transgression,  trespass,  and  sin  is  to  be  removed
from  the  people  of  God.  Yet  annually  anew,  and  each  time
confessedly  only  provisionally,  not  really  and  finally,  till  the
gracious  promise^  should  be  fulfilled  :  "  I  will  forgive  their  ini-
quity, and  I  will  remember  their  sin  no  more."  Accordingly  it
is  very  marked,  how  in  the  prophetic,  or  it  may  be  symbolical,
description  of  Ezekiel's  Temple^  all  mention  of  the  Day  of
Atonement  is  omitted  ;  for  Christ  has  come  "  an  high-priest
of  good  things  to  come,"  and  ''  entered  in  once  into  the  Holy
Place,"  "to////  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself."*

^  For  high-handed,  purposed  sins,  the  law  provided  no  sacrifice  (Heb.  x  26),
and  it  is  even  doubtful  whether  they  are  included  in  the  declaration  Lev.  xvi.  21,
wide  as  it  is.  Thank  God,  we  know  that  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son
cleanseth  from  all  sin,"  without  exception.

*  Jer,  xxxL  34.  ^  Ezek,  xL-xlvL  *  Heb,  ix.  Ii,  12,  26.


CHAPTER    XVIIL

ON     PURIFICATIONS.

THE  BURNING  OF  THE   RED   HEIFER — THE  CLEANSING  OF  THE  HEALED
LEPER — THE  TRIAL   OF  THE  WOMAN   SUSPECTED   OF   ADULTERY.

•*  And  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  See  thou  tell  no  man ;  but  go  thy  way,  show  thyself
to  the  priest,  and  offer  the  gift  that  Moses  commanded,  for  a  testimony  unto
them." — Matt.  viii.  4.

FESTIVE  seasons  were  not  the  only  occasions  which
brought  worshippers  to  Jerusalem.  Every  trespass
and  sin,  every  special  vow  and  offering,  and  every  defilement
called  them  to  the  Temple.  All  the  rites  then  enjoined  are
full  of  deep  meaning.  Selecting  from  them  those  on  which
the  practice  of  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  Christ  casts  a  special
light,  our  attention  is  first  called  to  a  service,  distinguished
from  the  rest  by  its  unique  character.

I .  The  purification  f^'om  the  defilement  of  death  by  the  ashes  oj
tlie  red  Jieifer  (Numb.  xix.).  In  the  worship  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, where  everything  was  symbolical,  that  is,  where  spiritual
realities  were  conveyed  through  outward  signs,  every  physical
defilement  would  point  to,  and  carry  with  it,  as  it  were,  a
spiritual  counterpart.  But  especially  was  this  the  case  with
reference  to  birth  and  death,  which  were  so  closely  connected
with  sin  and  the  second  death,  with  redemption  and  the  second
birth.     Hence,  all  connected  with  the  origin  of  life  and  with


290       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

pointing  forward  to  a  great  and  world-important  fact  yet  to  be
realised.  Lastly,  being  of  later,  and  indeed,  of  human,  not
Divine  institution,  the  authorities  at  Jerusalem  did  not  ven-
ture to  prescribe  for  them  special  rites  and  sacrifices,  which,
as  we  have  seen,  constituted  the  essence  of  Temple  worship.

Arranging  these  various  feasts  and  fasts  in  the  order  of
their  institution  and  importance,  we  have  : —

I.  The  Feast  oi  Piirimy  that  is  *'of  lots,"  or  the  Feast
of  Esther,  also  called  in  2  Maccab.  xv.  36  "  the  day  of  Mor-
decaiy^  which  was  observed  in  memory  of  the  preservation
of  the  Jewish  nation  at  the  time  of  Esther.  The  name
*' Purim''  is  derived  from  "the  lot"  which  Haman  cast  in
connection  with  his  wicked  desire.  It  was  proposed  by
Mordecai  to  perpetuate  the  anniversary  of  this  great  deli-
verance on  the  14th  and  the  15th  of  Adar  (about  the  beginning
of  March),  and  universally  agreed  to  by  the  Jews  of  his  time.^
Nevertheless,  according  to  the  Jerusalem  Talmud,  its  general
introduction  after  the  return  from  Babylon  formed  a  subject  of
grave  doubt  and  deliberation  among  the  "eighty-five  elders  "t—
a  number  which,  according  to  tradition,  included  upwards  of
thirty  prophets.^  Even  this  shows  that  Purim  was  never
more  than  a  popular  festival.  As  such  it  was  kept  with  great
merriment  and  rejoicing,  when  friends  and  relations  were  wont
to  send  presents  to  each  other.      There  seems  little  doubt

^  Esth.  iii.  7  ;  ix.  24.  '  Esth.  ix.  1 7-24.

*  Jer,  Megillah,  70  b.  The  learned  Jost  (Gesch.  d.  Judenth.,  i.  42,  note  i)
suggests  that  these  "85  elders"  were  really  the  commencement  of  **the  great
synagogue,"  to  which  so  many  of  the  Jewish  ordinances  were  traced  in  later  times.
The  number  was  afterwards,  as  Jost  thinks,  arbitrarily  increased  to  120,  which  is
that  assigned  by  tradition  to  **  the  great  synagogue. "  **  The  great  synagogue  "  may
be  regarded  as  the  ''constituent"  Jewish  authority  on  all  questions  of  ritual  after
the  return  from  Babylon.  Lastly,  Jost  suggests  that  the  original  85  were  the
signatories  to  **the  covenant,"  named  in  Neh.  x.  1-27.


Post- Mosaic  Festivals.  291

that  this  was  the  "  feast  of  the  Jews,'*  to  which  the  Saviour
"  went  up  to  Jerusalem/'^  when  He  healed  the  ''impotent  man  "
at  the  Pool  of  Bethesda.  For  no  other  feast  could  have  inter-
vened between  December  ^  and  the  Passover,^  except  that
of  the  ''  Dedication  of  the  Temple,"  and  that  is  specially-
designated  as  such,^  and  not  simply  as  "  a  feast  of  the  Jews.'*

So  far  as  we  can  gather,  the  religious  observances  of  Purim
commenced  with  a  fast — "the  fast  of  Esther" — on  the  13th
of  Adar.  But  if  Purim  fell  on  a  Sabbath  or  a  Friday  the  fast
was  relegated  to  the  previous  Thursday^  as  it  was  not  lawful
to  fast  either  on  a  Sabbath  or  the  day  preceding  it.  But
even  so,  there  were  afterwards  disputes  between  the  Jews  in
Palestine  and  the  much  larger  and  more  influential  com-
munity that  still  resided  in  Babylon  as  to  this  fast,^  which
seem  to  throw  doubt  on  its  very  early  observance.  On
the  evening  of  the  13th  of  Adar,  or  rather  on  the  beginning
of  the  14th,  the  book  of  Esther,  or  the  Megillah  ("the  roll,"
as  it  is  called  par  excellence),  was  publicly  read,  as  also  on
the  forenoon  of  the  14th  day,  except  in  ancient  walled  cities,
where  it  was  read  on  the  iSth.  In  Jerusalem,  therefore,
it  would  be  read  on  the  evening  of  the  13th,  and  on  the
15  th — always  provided  the  day  fell  not  on  a  Sabbath,  on
which  the  Megillah  was  not  allowed  to  be  read.^  In  the  later
Jewish  calendar  arrangements  care  was  taken  that  the  first
day  of  Purim  should  fall  on  the  first,  the  third,  the  fifth,
or  the  sixth  day  of  the  week.  Country  people,  who  went  into
their  market  towns  every  week  on  the  Monday  and  Thursday,

1  John  V.  I.       2  John  iv.  35.       s  John  vi.  4.       *  John  x.  22.

^  See  Jost,  vol.  i.  p.  265.

^  We  have  chiefly  quoted  from  the  Mishnic  tractate  Megillah,  which,  however,
is  more  discursive  even  than  the  rest,  and  alludes  to  many  subjects  besides  the  feast
of  Purim


292        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

were  not  required  to  come  up  again  specially  for  PtcriMy  and
in  such  synagogues  the  Megillahy  or  at  least  the  principal
portions  of  it,  was  read  on  the  previous  Thursday.  It  w^as  also
allowed  to  read  the  book  of  Esther  in  any  language  other
than  the  Hebrew,  if  spoken  by  the  Jews  resident  in  the
district,  and  any  person,  except  he  were  deaf,  an  idiot,  or
a  minor,  might  perform  this  service.  The  prayers  for  the
occasion  how  used  in  the  synagogue,  as  also  the  practice
of  springing  rattles  and  other  noisy  demonstrations  of  anger,
contempt,  and  scorn,  with  which  the  name  of  Haman,  where
it  occurs  in  the  Megillah,  is  always  greeted  by  young  and  old,
are,  of  course,  of  much  later  date.  Indeed,  so  far  from  pre-
scribing any  fixed  form  of  prayer,  the  Mishnah}  expressly
leaves  it  an  open  question,  to  be  determined  according  to
the  usage  of  a  place,  whether  or  not  to  accompany  the  reading
of  the  Megillah  with  prayer.  According  to  the  testimony
of  Josephus,^  in  his  time  *'  all  the  Jews  that  are  in  the  habit-
able earth  *'  kept  "  these  days  festivals,"  and  sent  "  portions  to
one  another."  In  our  our  own  days,  though  the  synagogue
has  prescribed  for  them  special  prayers  and  portions  of  Scrip-
ture, they  are  chiefly  marked  by  boisterous  and  uproarious
merrymaking,  even  beyond  the  limits  of  propriety.

2.  The  Feast  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Temple,  Chanuchah
("the  dedication"),  called  in  I  Maccab.  iv.  52-59 ''the  dedica-
tion of  the  altar,"  and  by  Josephus^  '*  the  feast  of  lights,"  was
another  popular  and  joyous  festival.  It  was  instituted  by
Judas  Maccabseus  in  164  B.C.,  when,  after  the  recovery  of
Jewish  independence  from  the  Syro-Grecian  domination,  the
Temple  of  Jerusalem  was  solemnly  purified,  the  old  polluted
altar   removed,    its   stones   put  in  a  separate  place  on  the

1  MegilL  iv.  I.  ^  Antiq,  xi.  6,  13.  ^  Antiq,  xii.  7,  7.


Post- Mosaic  Festivals.  293

Temple-mount,  and  the  worship  of  the  Lord  restored.  The
feast  commenced  on  the  25th  of  Chislev  (December),  and  lasted
for  eight  days.  On  each  of  them  the  "  Hallel  "  was  sung,  the
people  appeared  carrying  palm  and  other  branches,  and  there
was  a  grand  illumination  of  the  Temple  and  of  all  private
houses.  These  three  observances  bear  so  striking  a  resem-
blance to  what  we  know  about  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  that
it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  impression  of  some  intended  con-
nection between  the  two,  in  consequence  of  which  the  daily
singing  of  the  '*  Hallel,*'  and  the  carrying  of  palm  branches  was
adopted  during  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication,  while  the  practice
of  Temple-illumination  was  similarly  introduced  into  the  Feast
of  Tabernacles.^  All  this  becomes  the  more  interesting,  when
we  remember,  on  the  one  hand,  the  typical  meaning  of  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and  on  the  other  that  the  date  of  the
Feast  of  the  Dedication — the  25th  of  Chislev — seems  to  have
been  adopted  by  the  ancient  Church  as  that  of  the  birth  of
our  blessed  Lord — Christmas — the  Dedication  of  the  true
Temple,  which  was  the  body  of  Jesus.*

From  the  hesitating  language  of  Josephus,^  we  infer  that
even  in  his  time  the  real  origin  of  the  practice  of  illuminating
the  Temple  was  unknown.  Tradition,  indeed,  has  it  that  when
in  the  restored  Temple  the  sacred  candlestick*  was  to  be
lit  only  one  flagon  of  oil,  sealed  with  the  signet  of  the  high-
priest,  was  found  to  feed  the  lamps.  This  then  was  pure  oil,
but  the  supply  was  barely  sufficient  for  one  day — when,  lo,  by
a  miracle,  the  oil  increased,  and  the  flagon  remained  filled  for

1  In  point  of  fact,  the  three  are  so  compared  in  2  Mace.  x.  6,  and  even  the  same
name  applied  to  them,  i.  9,  18.  Geiger  {(Jrschr,  u.  Uebers.  p.  227)  has  attempted
an  ingenious  but  unsatisfactory  explanation  of  the  latter  circumstance.

*  John  ii.  19.  See  "Christmas  a  Festival  of  Jewish  Origin,"  in  the  Leisure
//our  for  Dec,  1873.  ^  Antiq,  xii.  7,  7.

*  According  to  tradition,  the  first  candlestick  in  that  Temple  was  of  iron,  tinned
over ;  the  second  of  silver,  and  then  only  a  golden  one  was  procured.


294       ^^^  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

eight  days,  in  memory  of  which  it  was  ordered  to  illuminate
for  the  same  space  of  time  the  Temple  and  private  houses.  A
learned  Jewish  writer,  Dr.  Herzfeld,^  suggests,  that  to  com-
memorate the  descent  of  fire  from  heaven  upon  the  altar
in  the  Temple  of  Solomon,^  "  the  feast  of  lights ''  was  insti-
tuted when  the  sacred  fire  was  relit  on  the  purified  altar
of  the  second  Temple.  But  even  so  the  practice  varied
in  its  details.  Either  the  head  of  a  house  might  light  one
candle  for  all  the  members  of  his  family,  or  else  a  candle
for  each  inmate,  or  if  very  religious  he  would  increase  the
number  of  candles  for  each  individual  every  evening,  so
that  if  a  family  of  ten  had  begun  the  first  evening  with  ten
candles  they  would  increase  them  the  next  evening  to  twenty,
and  so  on,  till  on  the  eighth  night  eighty  candles  were
lit.  But  here  also  there  was  a  difference  between  the  schools
of  Hillel  and  Shammai — the  former  observing  the  practice
as  just  described,  the  latter  burning  the  largest  number  of
candles  the  first  evening,  and  so  on  decreasingly  to  the  last  day
of  the  feast.  On  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication,  as  at  Purim  and'
New  Moons,  no  public  fast  was  to  be  kept,^  though  private
mourning  was  allowed.*

The  forms  of  prayer  at  present  in  use  by  the  Jews  are  of
comparatively  late  date,  and  indeed  the  Karaites,  who  in
many  respects  represent  the  more  ancient  traditions  of  Israel,
do  not  observe  the  festival  at  all.  But  there  cannot  be
a  doubt  that  our  blessed  Lord  Himself  attended  this  festival  at
Jerusalem,^  on  which  occasion  He  told  them  plainly:  "  I  and

i   Gesch.  d,  Volkes  Isr.,  vol.  ii.  p.  271.

2  2  Chron.  vii.  i.  3   Taan,,  ii.  10.

*  Moed  Katon,  iii.  9.  Accordingly,  the  statement  in  Kitto's  Encyd.,  i.  p.  653,
that  *'mournmg"  for  any  **  bereavement ''  was  not  permitted,  must  be  corrected,
or  at  least  modified.  ^  ]ohn  x.  22.


Post-Mosaic  Festivals.  295

My  Father  are  one.'*  This  gives  it  a  far  deeper  significance
than  the  rekindhng  of  the  fire  on  the  altar,  or  even  the  con-
nection of  this  feast  with  that  of  Tabernacles.

3.  The  Feast  of  Wood-offering^  took  place  on  the  15th  Ab^
(August),  being  the  last  of  the  nine  occasions  on  which  offerings
of  wood  were  brought  for  the  use  of  the  Temple.  For
the  other  eight  occasions  the  Talmud  names  certain  families
as  specially  possessing  this  privilege,  which  they  had  probably
originally  received  "  by  lot "  at  the  time  of  Nehemiah.^  At
any  rate  the  names  mentioned  in  the  Mishnah  are  exactly
the  same  as  those  in  the  book  of  Ezra.*  But  on  the  15  th  of
Ab,  along  with  certain  families,  ^// the  people — even  proselytes,
slaves,  Nethinim,  and  bastards,  but  notably  the  priests
and  Levites,  were  allowed  to  bring  up  wood,  whence  also
the  day  is  called  "  the  time  of  wood  for  the  priests."  The
other  eight  seasons  were  the  20th  of  Elul  (September),  the  ist
of  Tebeth  (January),  the  ist  of  Nisan  (end  of  March  or  April),
the  20th  of  Thammus  (save,  "for  the  family  of  David"),
the  5th,  the  7th,  the  loth,  and  the  20th  of  Ab.  It  will
be  observed  that  five  of  these  seasons  fall  in  the  month  of  Ab,
probably  because  the  wood  was  then  thought  to  be  in  best
condition.  The  Rabbinical  explanations  of  this  are  confused
and  contradictory,  and  do  not  account  for  the  15th  of  Ab
being  called,  as  it  was,  ''  the  day  on  which  the  axe  is  broken,"
unless  it  were  that  after  that  date  till  spring  no  wood  might  be
felled  for  the  altar,  although  what  had  been  previously  cut
might    be  brought   up.     The    15  th  of  the  month  was  fixed

*  Mish.,  Taan.y  iv.  ;  Jos.  yew.  Wars,  ii.  17,  6.

2  By^  a  mistake,  our  copies  of  Josephus  make  him  fix  the  14th  as  the  date  of
this  feast.
^  Neh.  X.  34 ;  xiiL  31.  *  Ezra  ii.  ;  see  Ilerzfeld,  vol.  i.  469 ;  ii.  144.


296       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

for  the  feast,  probably  because  at  full  moon  the  month  was
regarded  as  at  its  maturity.  Tradition,  of  course,  had  its  own
story  to  account  for  it.  According  to  one  version  it  was
Jeroboam,  the  wicked  king  of  Israel,  to  whom  so  much  evil  is
always  traced ;  according  to  another,  a  Syro-Grecian  monarch —
Antiochus  Epiphanes;  and  according  to  yet  a  third  some  un-
named monarch  who  had  prohibited  the  carrying  of  wood  and
of  the  first-fruits  to  Jerusalem,  when  certain  devoted  families
braved  the  danger,  and  on  that  day  secretly  introduced
wood  into  the  Temple,  in  acknowledgment  whereof  the  privi-
lege was  for  ever  afterwards  conceded  to  their  descendants.

The  wood  was  first  deposited  in  an  outer  chamber,  where
that  which  was  worm-eaten  or  otherwise  unfit  for  the  altar
was  picked  out  by  priests  who  were  disqualified  from  other
ministry.  The  rest  was  handed  over  to  the  priests  who
were  Levitically  qualified  for  their  service,  and  by  them
stored  in  **the  wood  chamber.''  The  15th  of  Ab  was  ob-
served as  a  popular  and  joyous  festival.  On  this  occasion
(as  on  the  Day  of  Atonement)  the  maidens  went  dressed  in
white,  to  dance  and  sing  in  the  vineyards  around  Jerusalem,
when  an  opportunity  was  offered  to  young  men  to  select
their  companions  for  life.  We  may  venture  on  a  suggestion
to  account  for  this  curious  practice.  According  to  the  Talmud,
the  15th  of  Ab  was  the  day  on  which  the  prohibition  was
removed  which  prevented  heiresses  from  marrying  out  of  their
own  tribes.^  If  there  is  any  historical  foundation  for  this,  it
would  be  very  significant,  that  when  all  Israel,  without  any
distinction  of  tribes  or  families,  appeared  to  make  their  offer-
ings at  Jerusalem,  they  should  be  at  liberty  similarly  to  select
their  partners  in  life  without  the  usual  restrictions.
»  Comp.  Herzfeld,  vol.  ii.  p.  144,  note  3^


Post-Mosaic  Festivals.  297

4.  Fasts. — These  may  be  arranged  into  public  and  privatCy
the  latter  on  occasions  of  personal  calamity  or  felt  need.  The
former  alone  can  here  claim  our  attention.  Properly  speaking,
there  was  only  one  Divinely-ordained  public  fast,  that  of  the
Day  of  Atonement.  But  it  was  quite  in  accordance  with  the
will  of  God,  and  the  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,
that  when  great  national  calamities  had  overtaken  Israel,  or
great  national  wants  arose,  or  great  national  sins  were  to  be
confessed,  a  day  of  public  fasting  and  humiliation  should  be
proclaimed.^  To  these  the  Jews  added,  during  the  Babylonish
captivity,  what  may  be  called  memorial-fasts^  on  the  anni-
versaries of  great  national  calamities.  Evidently  this  was  an
unhealthy  religious  movement.  What  were  idly  bewailed  as
national  calamities  were  really  Divine  judgments,  caused  by
national  sins,  and  should  have  been  acknowledged  as  righteous,
the  people  turning  from  their  sins  in  true  repentance  unto  God.
This,  if  we  rightly  understand  it,  was  the  meaning  of  Zecha-
riah's  reply-  to  those  who  inquired  whether  the  fasts  of  the
fourth,  the  fifth,  the  seventh,  and  the  tenth  months,  were  to  be
continued  after  the  return  of  the  exiles  from  Babylon.  At
the  same  time,  the  inquiry  shows,  that  the  four  great  Jewish
fasts,  which,  besides  the  Day  of  Atonement  and  the  Fast  of
Esther,  are  still  kept,  were  observed  so  early  as  the  Babylonish
captivity.^  "  The  fast  of  the  fourth  month  "  took  place  on  the
17th  Thammus  (about  June  or  July),  in  memory  of  the  taking
of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  and  the  interruption  of  the
daily  sacrifice.  To  this  tradition  adds,  that  it  was  also  the
anniversary  of  making  the  golden  calf,  and  of  Moses  breaking
the  Tables  of  the  Law.     **The  fast  of  the  fifth  month,"  on  the

*  See  for  example,  Judg.  xx.  26  ;  I  Sam.  vii.  6  ;  i  Kings  xxi.  27  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  3»
2  Zech.  vii.  viii.  ^  Zech.  viii.  19,


298        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

9th  of  Ab,  was  kept  on  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  first
(and  afterwards  of  the  second)  Temple.  It  is  significant  that
the  second  Temple  (that  of  Herod)  was  destroyed  on  the
first  day  of  the  week.  Tradition  has  it,  that  on  that  day-
God  had  pronounced  judgment  that  the  carcasses  of  all
who  had  come  out  of  Egypt  should  fall  in  the  wilderness,
and  also,  that  again  it  was  fated  much  later  to  witness  the
fulfilment  of  Jer.  xxvi.  18-23,  when  a  Roman  centurion  had
the  ploughshare  drawn  over  the  site  of  Zion  and  of  the
Temple.  "The  fast  of  the  seventh  month,"  on  the  2nd
of  Tishri,  is  said  by  tradition  to  be  in  memory  of  the
slaughter  of  Gedahah  and  his  associates  at  Mizpah.^  "The
fast  of  the  tenth  month  "  was  on  the  lOth  of  Tebeth,  when  the
siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  commenced.

Besides  these  four,  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  the  Fast  of
Esther,  the  Jewish  calendar  at  present  contains  other  twenty-two
fast-days.  But  that  is  not  all.  It  was  customary  to  fast  twice
a  week^  between  the  Paschal  week  and  Pentecost,  and  be-
tween the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  and  that  of  the  Dedication  of
the  Temple.  The  days  appointed  for  this  purpose  were  the
Monday  and  Thursday  of  every  week — because,  according  to
tradition,  Moses  went  up  Mount  Sinai  the  second  time  to
receive  the  Tables  of  the  Law  on  a  Thursday,  and  came  down
again  on  a  Monday.  On  public  fasts,  the  practice  was^  to
bring  the  ark  which  contained  the  rolls  of  the  law  from  the
synagogue  into  the  streets,  and  to  strew  ashes  upon  it.  The
people  all  appeared  covered  with  sackcloth  and  ashes.  Ashes
were  publicly  strewn  on  the  heads  of  the  elders  and  judges.
Then  one  more  venerable  than  the  rest  would  address  the
people,  his  sermon  being  based  on  such  admonition  as  this ;
Jer.  xli.  I.  ^  Luke  xviii.  12.  ^  See  Taaniih,  ii.  1-6.


Post-Mosaic  Festivals.  299

"  My  brethren,  it  is  not  said  of  the  men  of  Nineveh,  that  God
had  respect  to  their  sackcloth  or  their  fasting,  but  that  '  God
saw  their  works,  that  they  turned  from  their  evil  way.'^
Similarly,  it  is  written  in  the  'traditions*  (of  the  prophets)  :
*  Rend  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments,  and  turn  unto
Jehovah  your  God.'"^  An  aged  man,  whose  heart  and  home
**  God  had  emptied,"  that  he  might  give  himself  wholly  to
prayer,  was  chosen  to  lead  the  devotions.  Confession  of  sin
and  prayer  mingled  with  the  penitential  Psalms.^  In  Jeru-
salem they  gathered  at  the  eastern  gate,  and  seven  times
as  the  voice  of  prayer  ceased,  they  bade  the  priests  "blow!"
and  they  blew  with  horns  and  their  priests'  trumpets.  In  other
towns,  they  only  blew  horns.  After  prayer,  the  people  retired
to  the  cemeteries  to  mourn  and  weep.  In  order  to  be  a  proper
fast,  it  must  be  continued  from  one  sundown  till  after  the  next,
when  the  stars  appeared,  and  for  about  twenty-six  hours  the
most  rigid  abstinence  from  all  food  and  drink  was  enjoined.
Most  solemn  as  some  of  these  ordinances  sound,  the  reader
of  the  New  Testament  knows  how  sadly  all  degenerated
into  mere  formalism ;  ^  how  frequent  fasting  became  mere
work-  and  self-righteousness,  instead  of  being  the  expression
of  true  humiliation ;  ®  and  how  the  very   appearance  of  the

*  Jonah  iii.  lo.  *  Joel  ii.  13.

3  Psalms  cii.  ;  cxx.  ;  cxxi.  ;  cxxx.  Our  account  is  based  on  the  Mishnah
( Taan,  ii. ).  But  we  have  not  given  the  Psalms  in  the  order  there  mentioned,  nor
yet  reproduced  the  prayers  and  ' '  benedictions, "  because  they  seem  mostly,  if  not
entirely,  to  be  of  later  date.  In  general,  each  of  the  latter  bases  the  hope  of  being
heard  on  some  Scriptural  example  of  deliverance  in  answer  to  prayer,  such  as  that
of  Abraham  on  Mount  Moriah,  of  Israel  when  passing  through  the  Red  Sea,  of
Joshua  at  Gilgal,  of  Samuel  at  Mizpah,  of  Elijah  on  Mount  Carmel,  of  Jonah  in
the  whale's  belly,  and  of  David  and  Solomon  in  Jerusalem.  Certain  relaxations  of
the  fast  were  allowed  to  the  priests  when  actually  on  their  ministry.

*  See  the  very  interesting  description  of  details  in  Taan.  ii    5.

*  Matt,  ix,  14;  Mark  ii.  18;  Luke  v.  33.  ®  Luke  xviii.  12.


300       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

penitent,  unwashed  and  with  ashes  on  his  head,  was  even  made
matter  of  boasting  and  religious  show.^  So  true  is  it  that  all
attempts  at  penitence,  amendment,  and  religion,  without
the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  and  a  change  of  heart,  only  tend  to
entangle  man  in  the  snare  of  self-deception,  to  fill  him  with
f^piritual  pride,  and  still  further  to  increase  his  real  alienation
from  God.^

1  Matt  vi.  1 6.

2  Of  the  three  sects  or  schools  the  Pharisees  were  here  the  strictest,  being  in  this
jxlso  at  the  opposite  pole  from  the  Sadducees.  The  fasts  of  the  Essenes  were  indeed
even  more  stringent,  and  almost  constant,  but  they  were  intended  not  to  procure
7nerit^  but  to  set  the  soul  free  from  the  bondage  of  the  body,  which  was  regarded
as  the  seat  of  all  sin.  Besides  the  above-mentioned  fast,  and  one  of  all  the  firstborn
on  the  eve  of  every  Passover,  such  of  the  **  men  of  the  station  "  as  went  not  up  to
Jerusalem  with  their  company  fasted  on  the  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  and
Thursday,  in  their  respective  synagogues,  and  prayed  for  a  blessing  on  their
brethren  and  on  the  people.  They  connected  their  fasts  and  prayers  with  the
section  in  Gen.  i.,  which  they  read  on  those  days— praying  on  the  Monday  (Gen.
i.  9)  for  those  at  sea  ;  on  the  Tuesday  (vers.  1 1,  12)  for  all  on  a  journey  ;  on  the  Wed-
nesday (ver.  14,  on  account  of  the  supposed  dangerous  influences  of  sun  and  moon)
against  diseases  of  children ;  and  on  the  Thursday  (ver.  20)  for  women  labouring
with  child  and  for  infants.

Further  particulars  would  lead  us  from  a  description  of  the  Temple- services  to
those  of  the  synagogue.  But  it  is  interesting  to  note  how  closely  the  Roman
Church  has  adopted  the  practices  of  the  synagogue.  In  imitation  of  the  four
Jewish  fasts  mentioned  in  Zech.  viii.  19,  the  year  was  divided  into  four  seasons
— Quatember — each  marked  by  a  fast — three  of  these  being  traced  by  tradition
to  Bishop  Callistus  (223),  and  the  fourth  to  Pope  Leo  I.  (440).  In  1095,  Urban  ii.
fixed  these  four  fasts  on  the  Wednesdays  after  Ash- Wednesday,  Whit-Sunday,
the  Exaltation  of  the  Cross,  and  the  Feast  oi  S.  Lucia  {13th  December),  according
to  this  monkish  distich  : —

**  Post  Luciam,  cineres,  post  sanctum  pneuma,  crucemque
Tempora  dat  quatuor  feria  quarta  sequens. "
The  early  Church  substituted  for  the  two  weekly  Jewish  fast-days — Monday  and
Thursday — the  so-called  '*  dies  stationum,"  **  guard  or  watch-days  "  of  the  Chris*
tian  soldier,  or  Christian  fast-days — Wednesday  and  Friday,  on  which  the  Saviour
had  been  respectively  betrayed  and  crucified.  See  the  article  *'  Fasten,^'*  in
Herzog's  EncycL,  vol.  iii.  pp.  334-339.


CHAPTER    XVII.

POST-MOSAIC    FESTIVALS.

*'  And  it  was  at  Jerusalem  the  feast  of  the  dedication,  and  it  was  winter.     And
Jesus  walked  in  the  Temple  in  Solomon's  Porch." — ^John  x.  22,  23.

BESIDES  the  festivals  mentioned  in  the  Law  of  Moses,
other  festive  seasons  were  also  observed  at  the  time  of
our  Lord,  to  perpetuate  the  memory  either  of  great  national
deliverances  or  of  great  national  calamities.  The  former  were
popular  feasts,  the  latter  public  fasts.  Though  most,  if  not
all  of  them,  are  alluded  to  in  the  Canonical  Scriptures,  it
is  extremely  difficult  to  form  a  clear  idea  of  how  they  were
kept  in  the  Temple.  Many  of  the  practices  connected  with
them,  as  described  in  Jewish  writings,  or  customary  at  present,
are  of  much  later  date  than  Temple  times,  or  else  apply
rather  to  the  festive  observances  in  the  various  synagogues
of  the  land  than  to  those  in  the  central  sanctuary.  And
the  reason  of  this  is  evident.  Though  those  who  were  at
leisure  might  like  to  go  to  Jerusalem  for  every  feast,  yet
the  vast  majority  of  the  people  would,  except  on  the  great
festivals,  naturally  gather  in  the  synagogues  of  their  towns  and
villages.  Moreover,  these  feasts  and  fasts  were  rather  national
than  typical — they  commemorated   a  past   event  instead  of

U


302        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Sei^vices.

death,  implied  defilement,  and  required  Levitical  purification.
But  here  there  was  considerable  difference.  Passing  over  the
minor  defilements  attaching  to  what  is  connected  with  the  origin
of  life,  the  woman  who  had  given  birth  to  a  child  was  Levitically
unclean  for  forty  or  for  eighty  days,  according  as  she  had
become  the  mother  of  a  son  or  a  daughter.^  After  that  she  was
to  offer  for  her  purification  a  lamb  for  a  burnt-,  and  a  turtle-
dove, or  young  pigeon,  for  a  sin-offering ;  in  case  of  poverty,
altogether  only  two  turtledoves  or  two  young  pigeons.  We
remember  that  the  mother  of  Jesus  availed  herself  of  that
provision  for  the  poor,  when  at  the  same  time  she  presented
in  the  Temple  the  Royal  Babe,  her  firstborn  son.^

On  bringing  her  offering,  she  would  enter  the  Temple
through  "  the  gate  of  the  firstborn,"  and  stand  in  waiting  at
the  gate  of  Nicanor,  from  the  time  that  the  incense  was
kindled  on  the  golden  altar.  Behind  her,  in  the  Court  of  the
Women,  was  the  crowd  of  worshippers,  while  she  herself,
at  the  top  of  the  Levites'  steps,  which  led  up  to  the  great
court,  would  witness  all  that  passed  in  the  sanctuary.  At
last  one  of  the  officiating  priests  would  come  to  her  at  the
gate  of  Nicanor,  and  take  from  her  hand  the  '*  poor's  offering,"^
which  she  had  brought.  The  morning  sacrifice  was  ended ;  and
but  few  would  linger  behind  while  the  offering  for  her  purifica-
tion was  actually  made.  She  who  brought  it  mingled  prayer
and  thanksgiving  with  the  service.  And  now  the  priest  once
more  approached  her,  and,  sprinkling  her  with  the  sacrificial
blood,  declared  her  cleansed.  Her  "  firstborn  "  was  next  re-^
deemed  at  the  hand  of  the  priest,  with  five  shekels  of  silver  ;*

^  Lev.  xii.  *  Luke  ii.  22.  ^  So  it  is  liierally  called  in  the  Talmud.

*  According  to  the  Mishnah  {Beeho7\  viii.  7)  **of  Tyrian  weight ''=  10  to  12
shillings  of  our  money.  The  Rabbis  lay  it  down  that  redemption-money  was  only
paid  for  a  son  who  was  the  firstborn  of  his  mother,  and  who  was  "suitable  for
the  priesthood,"  that  is,  had  no  disqualifying  bodily  blemishes.


On  Purifications  303

two  benedictions  being  at  the  same  time  pronounced,  one  for
the  happy  event  which  had  enriched  the  family  with  a  firstborn,
the  other  for  the  law  of  redemption.^  And  when,  with  grateful
heart,  and  solemnised  in  spirit,  she  descended  those  fifteen  steps
where  the  Levites  were  wont  to  sing  the  "  Hallel,"  a  sudden
light  of  heavenly  joy  filled  the  heart  of  one  who  had  long
been  in  waiting  '*for  the  consolation  of  Israel."  If  the  Holy
Spirit  had  revealed  it  to  just  and  devout  Simeon^  that  he
**  should  not  see  death  before  he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ,*'
who  should  vanquish  death,  it  was  the  same  Spirit,  who  had
led  him  up  into  the  Temple  '*  when  the  parents  brought  in  the
child  Jesus,  to  do  for  Him  after  the  custom  of  the  law."  Then
the  aged  believer  to®k  the  Divine  Babe  from  His  mother's
into  his  own  arms.  He  felt  that  the  faithful  Lord  had  truly
fulfilled  His  word.  Content  now  to  depart  in  peace,  he
blessed  God  from  the  fulness  of  a  grateful  heart,  for  his  eyes  had
seen  His  salvation — "a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,"  and  the
*' glory  of  His  people  Israel."  But  Joseph  and  Mary  listened,
wondering,  to  the  words  which  fell  from  Simeon's  Hps.

Such  was  the  service  of  purification  connected  with  the
origin  of  life.  Yet  it  was  not  nearly  so  solemn  or  important
as  that  for  the  removal  of  defilement  from  contact  with  death.
A  stain  aj;tached  indeed  to  the  spring  of  life,  but  death,  which
cast  its  icy  shadow  from  the  gates  of  Paradise  to  those  of
Hades,  pointed  to  the  second  death,  under  whose  ban  every-
one lay  and  which,  if  unremoved,  would  exercise  eternal  sway.
Hence  defilement  by  the  dead  was  symbolically  treated  as  the
greatest  of  all.  It  lasted  seven  days ;  it  required  a  special  kind  of
purification ;  and  it  extended  not  only  to  those  who  had  touched
he  dead,  but  even  to  the  house  or  tent  where  the  body  had
See  Jost,  vol.  ii.  p.  264.


304      The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

lain,  and  to  all  open  vessels  therein.  More  than  that,  to  enter
such  a  house  ;  to  come  into  contact  with  the  smallest  bone,  or
with  a  grave ;  ^  even  to  partake  of  a  feast  for  the  dead,^
rendered  ceremonially  unclean  for  seven  days.^  Nay,  he  who
was  thus  defiled  in  turn  rendered  everything  unclean  which
he  touched.^  For  priests  and  Nazarites  the  law  was  even
more  stringent.^  The  former  were  not  to  defile  themselves
by  touching  any  dead  body,  except  those  of  their  nearest
of  kin ;  the  high-priest  was  not  to  approach  even  those  of
his  own  parents.

In  general,  Jewish  writers  distinguish  six  degrees,  which  they
respectively  term,  according  to  their  intensity,  the  "  fathers
of  fathers,"  the  ''  fathers,"  and  the  ''  first,"  "  second,"  "  third,"
and  ^'fourth  children  of  defilement."  They  enumerate  in  all
twenty-nine  *' fathers  of  defilement,"  arising  from  various
causes,  and  of  these  no  less  than  eleven  arise  from  some  con-
tact with  a  dead  body.  Hence  also  the  law  made  here  excep-
tional provision  for  purification.  "  A  red  heifer  without  spot,"
that  is,  without  any  white  or  black  hair  on  its  hide,  without
"  blemish,  and  on  which  never  yoke  came,"  was  to  be  sacri-
ficed as  a  sin-offering^  and  that  outside  the  camp,  not  in  the
sanctuary,  and  by  the  son  of,  or  by  the  presumptive  suc-
cessor to  the  high-priest.  The  blood  of  this  sacrifice  was
to  be  sprinkled  ^^v^xv  times  with  the  finger,  not  on  the
altar,  but  towards  the  sanctuary ;  then  the  whole  animal —
skin,  flesh,  blood,  and  dung — burned,  the  priest  casting  into

1  According  to  Jewish  tradition,  a  dead  body,  however  deeply  buried,  communi-
cated defilement  all  the  way  up  to  the  surface,  unless  indeed  it  were  vaulted  in,  or
vaulted  over,  to  cut  off  contact  with  the  earth  above.

*  Hos.  ix.  4.  3  Numb.  xix.  11-16,  18;  xxxi.  19.

*  Numb.  xix.  22  ;  comp.  Hagg.  ii.  13.

*  Lev.  xxi.  etc. ;  comp.  Ezek.  xliv,  25,  etc.  \  Numb.  vi.  7,  etc    ^  Numb.  xix.  9,  17,


On  Purifications.  305

the  midst  of  the  burning  "cedarwood,  and  hyssop,  .and
scarlet."  The  ashes  of  this  sacrifice  were  to  be  gathered  by
**  a  man  that  is  clean,"  and  laid  up  "  without  the  camp  in  a
clean  place."  But  the  priest,  he  that  burned  the  red  heifer,  and
who  gathered  her  ashes,  were  to  be  *'  unclean  until  the  even,"
to  wash  their  clothes,  and  the  two  former  also  to  "  bathe,"
their  *'  flesh  in  water."^  When  required  for  purification  a  clean
person  was  to  take  of  those  ashes,  put  them  in  a  vessel,  pour
upon  them  *'  living  water,"  then  dip  hyssop  in  it,  and  on  the
third  and  seventh  days  sprinkle  him  who  was  to  be  purified  ;
after  which  he  had  to  wash  his  clothes  and  bathe  his  flesh,
when  he  became  '*  clean  "  on  the  evening  of  the  seventh  day.
The  tent  or  house,  and  all  the  vessels  in  it,  were  to  be  similarly
purified.  Lastly,  he  that  touched  "  the  water  of  separation,"
"  of  avoidance,"  or  "  of  uncleanness,"  ^  was  to  be  unclean  until
even,  and  he  that  sprinkled  it  to  wash  his  clothes.^

From  all  these  provisions  it  is  evident  that  as  death  carried
with  it  the  greatest  defilement,  so  the  sin-offering  for  its  puri-
fication was  in  itself  and  in  its  consequences  the  most  marked.
And  its  application  must  have  been  so  frequently  necessary
in  every  family  and  circle  of  acquaintances  that  the  great
truths  connected  with  it  were  constantly  kept  in  view  of  the
people.  In  general,  it  may  here  be  stated,  that  the  laws  in
regard  to  defilement  were  primarily  intended  as  symbols  of
spiritual  truths,  and  not  for  social,  nor  yet  sanitary  purposes,
though  such  results  would  also  flow  from  them.  Sin  had
rendered  fellowship  with  God  impossible ;  sin  was  death,  and
had  wrought  death,  and  the  dead  body  as  well  as  the  spirit-
ually dead  soul  were  the  evidence  of  its  sway.

1  Numb,  xix.  7,  8.

t  The  expression  is  fully  discussed  by  Saalschiitz,  Mos,  ReckU^  pp.  341,  342.

•  Numb.  xix.  21,

X


3o5        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

It  has  been  well  pointed  out/  that  all  classes  of  Levitiral
defilement  can  ultimately  be  traced  back  to  death,  with  its
two  great  outward  symptoms,  the  corruption  which  appears  in
the  skin  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  and  to  which  leprosy  may
be  regarded  as  akin,  and  the  fluxes  from  the  dead  body,
which  have  their  counterpart  in  the  morbid  fluxes  of  the  living
body.  As  the  direct  manifestation  of  sin  which  separates
man  from  God,  defilement  by  the  dead  required  a  sin-ojfering^
and  the  ashes  of  the  red  heifer  are  expressly  so  designated  in
the  words  :  *'  It  is  a  sin-offering^^  But  it  differs  from  all  other
sin-offerings.  The  sacrifice  was  to  be  of  pure  red  colour  ;  one
"  upon  which  never  came  yoke ; "  ^  and  a  female,  all  other
sin-offerings  for  the  congregation  being  males.*  These  par-
ticulars symbolically  point  to  life  in  its  freshness,  fulness,  and
fruitfulness — that  is,  the  fullest  life  and  the  spring  of  life.  But
what  distinguished  it  even  more  from  all  others  was,  that  it
was  a  sacrifice  offered  once  for  all  (at  least  so  long  as  its
ashes  lasted)  ;  that  its  blood  was  sprinkled,  not  on  the  altar,
but  outside  the  camp  towards  the  sanctuary ;  and  that  it
was  wholly  burnt,  along  with  cedarwood,  as  the  symbol  of
imperishable  existence,  hyssop,  as  that  of  purification  from
corruption,  and  "  scarlet,"  which  from  its  colour  was  the
emblem  of  life.  Thus  the  sacrifice  of  highest  life,  brought
as  a  sin-ofifering,  and,  so  far  as  possible,  once  for  all,  was  in  its
turn  accompanied  by  the  symbols  of  imperishable  existence,
freedom  from  corruption,  and  fulness  of  life,  so  as  yet  more  to

*  By  Sommers,  in  his  BibL  Abk.,  vol.  i.  p.  201,  etc.

'*  Numb.  ix.  17.  The  Authorised  Version  translates,  without  any  reason  :  **  It  is  a
purification  for  sin."  It  seems  strange  indeed,  that  Professor  Fairbaim  should  have
reproduced  this  rendering  without  note  or  comment  in  his  Typology,  vol.  ii.  p.  376.

^  The  only  other  instance  in  which  this  is  enjoined  is  Deut.  xxi.  3,  though  we
read  of  it  again  in  i  Sam.  vi.  7.  *  Lev.  iv.  14.


On  Purifications,  307

intensify  its  significance.  But  even  this  is  not  all.  The
gathered  ashes  with  running  water  were  sprinkled  on  the  third
and  seventh  days  on  that  which  was  to  be  purified.  Assuredly,
if  death  meant  *'  the  wages  of  sin,"  this  purification  pointed,
in  all  its  details,  to  "  the  gift  of  God,"  which  is  "  eternal  life,"
through  the  sacrifice  of  Him  in  Whom  is  the  fulness  of  life.

And  here  there  is  a  remarkable  analogy  between  three
sacrifices,  which,  indeed,  form  a  separate  group.  The  scape-
goat, which  was  to  remove  the  personal  guilt  of  the  Israelites
— not  their  theocratic  alienation  from  the  sanctuary  ;  the  red
heifer,  which  was  to  take  away  the  defilement  of  death,
as  that  which  stood  between  God  and  man  ;  and  the  "  living
bird,"  dipped  in  "the  water  and  the  blood,"  and  then  '*let
loose  in  the  field  "  at  the  purification  from  leprosy,  which  sym-
bolised the  living  death  of  personal  sinfulness,  were  all,  either
wholly  offered,  or  in  their  essentials  completed  outside  the
sanctuary.  In  other  words,  the  Old  Testament  dispensation
had  confessedly  within  its  sanctuary  no  real  provision  for  the
spiritual  wants  to  which  they  symbolically  pointed  ;  their
removal  lay  outside  its  sanctuary  and  beyond  its  symbols.
Spiritual  death,  as  the  consequence  of  the  fall,  personal
sinfialness,  and  personal  guilt  lay  beyond  the  reach  of  the
Temple-provision,  and  pointed  directly  to  Him  who  was  to
come.  Every  death,  every  case  of  leprosy,  every  Day  of
Atonement,  was  a  call  for  His  advent,  as  the  eye,  enlightened
by  faith,  would  follow  the  goat  into  the  wilderness,  or  watch
the  living  bird  as,  bearing  the  mingled  blood  and  water,  he
winged  his  flight  into  liberty,  or  read  in  the  ashes  sprung  from
the  burning  of  the  red  heifer  the  emblem  of  purification  from
spiritual  death.  Hence,  also,  the  manifest  internal  connection
between  these  rites.     In  the  sacrifices  of  the    Day  of  Atone-


3o8        The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

ment  and  of  the  purified  leper,  the  offering  was  twofold,  one
being  slain,  the  other  sent  away  alive,  while  the  purification
from  leprosy  and  from  death  had  also  many  traits  in  common.
Lastly,  all  these  sacrifices  equally  defiled  those  who  took
part  in  their  offering,^  except  in  the  case  of  leprosy,  where  the
application  would  necessarily  only  be  personal.  Thus,  also,
we  understand  why  the  red  heifer  as,  so  to  speak,  the  most
intense  of  sin-offerings,  was  zvholly  burnt  outside  the  camp,
and  other  sin-offerings  only  partially  so.^  For  this  burning
signified  that  "  in  the  theocracy  there  was  no  one,  who,  by
his  own  holiness,  could  bear  or  take  away  the  sin  imputed  to
these  sin-offerings,  so  that  it  was  needful,  as  the  wages  of  sin,
to  burn  the  sacrifice  which  had  been  made  sin."  ^  The  ashes
of  this  sin-offering,  mixed  with  living  water  and  sprinkled
with  hyssop,  symbolised  purification  from  that  death  which
separates  between  God  and  man.  This  parallelism  between
the  blood  of  Christ  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer,  on  the  one
hand,  and  on  the  other  between  the  purification  of  the  flesh
by  these  means,  and  that  of  the  conscience  from  dead  works,  is
thus  expressed  in  Heb.  ix.  13,  14:  "If  the  blood  of  bulls  and
of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  defiled,
sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh:  how  much  more  shall
the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered
himself  without  spot  to  God,  purify  your  conscience  from
dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ? "  And  that  this  spiritual
meaning  of  the  types  was  clearly  apprehended  under  the  Old
Testament  appears,  for  example,  from  the  reference  to  it  in
this  prayer  of  David  :*  "  Purge  me  from  sin^  (purify  me)  with

*  Hence  the  high-priest  was  prohibited  from  offering  the  red  heifer.

'  Lev.  iv.  II,  12,  20,  etc.         ^  Keil,  Bibl.  Archccol.^  vol.  i.  p.  283.         ^  Psa.  li.  7,

*  The  Hebrew  {Piel)  form  for  "  purge  from  sin  "  has  no  EngHsh  equivalent,  unless
we  were  to  Cviin  the  word  '*  unsin  "  or  *'  unguilt "  me — remove  my  sin.


On  Purifications.  309

hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean  :  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter
than  snow,"  which  is  again  further  applied  in  what  the  prophet
Isaiah  says  about  the  forgiveness  of  sin.^

This  is  not  the  place  more  fully  to  vindicate  the  views  here
propounded.  Without  some  deeper  symbolical  meaning
attaching  to  them,  the  peculiarities  of  the  sin-offering  of  the
red  heifer  would  indeed  be  well-nigh  unintelligible.^  This  must
be  substantially  the  purport  of  a  Jewish  tradition  to  the  effect
that  King  Solomon,  who  knew  the  meaning  of  all  God's  ordi-
nances, was  unable  to  understand  that  of  the  red  heifer.  A
"  Haggadah  ".  maintains  that  the  wisest  of  men  had  in  Eccl.
vii.  23  thus  described  his  experience  in  this  respect  :  "  All  thi's
have  I  proved  by  wisdom,"  that  is,  all  other  matters  ;  "  I  said,
I  will  be  wise,"  that  is,  in  reference  to  the  meaning  of  the  red
heifer,  "  but  it  was  far  from  me."  But  if  Jewish  traditionalism
was  thus  conscious  of  its  spiritual  ignorance  in  regard  to  this
type,  it  was  none  the  less  zealous  in  prescribing,  with  even
more  than  usual  precision,  its  ceremonial.  The  first  object
was  to  obtain  a  proper  "  red  heifer  "  for  the  sacrifice.  The
Mishnah^  states  the  needful  age  of  such  a  red  heifer  as
from  two  to  four  and  even  five  years  ;  the  colour  of  its
hide,  two  white  or  black  hairs  springing  from  the  same  follicle
disqualifying  it ;  and  how,  if  she  have  been  put  to  any  use,
though  only  a  cloth  had  been  laid  on  her,  she  would  no  longer
answer  the  requirement  that  upon  her  '*  never  came  yoke."

Even  more  particular  are  the  Rabbis  to  secure  that  the  sacri-

»  Isa.  i.  18.

2  It  is  impossible  here  fully  to  explain  our  views.  All  the  more  we  bespeak  for
them  a  calm  and  candid  examination.  Christian  writers  in  this  count  ly,  whether
theological  or  popular,  have  either  passed  over  the  subject,  or  (like  Fairbairn,
Typology^  vol.  ii.  p.  376)  taken  too  superficial  a  view  to  require  special  notice,

*  Parahf  i.  ii.


3IO        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

fice  be  properly  offered.^  Seven  days  before,  the  priest  destined
for  the  service  was  separated  and  kept  in  the  Temple — in  "  the
House  of  Stoves" — where  he  was  daily  sprinkled  with  the
ashes — as  the  Rabbis  fable — of  all  the  red  heifers  ever  offered.
When  bringing  the  sacrifice,  he  was  to  wear  his  white  priestly
raiments.  According  to  their  tradition,  there  was  an  arched
roadway  leading  from  the  east  gate  of  the  Temple  out  upon  the
Mount  of  Olives — double  arched,  that  is,  arched  also  over  the
supporting  pillars,  for  fear  of  any  possible  pollution  through
the  ground  upwards.  Over  this  the  procession  passed.  On
the  Mount  of  Olives  the  elders  of  Israel  were  already  in  wait-
ing. First,  the  priest  immersed  his  whole  body,  then  he
approached  the  pile  of  cedar-,  pine-,  and  fig-wood  which  was
heaped  like  a  pyramid,  but  having  an  opening  in  the  middle,
looking  towards  the  west.  Into  this  the  red  heifer  was  thrust,
and  bound,  with  its  head  towards  the  south  and  its  face
looking  to  the  west,  the  priest  standing  east  of  the  sacrifice,
his  face,  of  course,  also  turned  westwards.  Slaying  the
sacrifice  with  his  right  hand,  he  caught  up  the  blood  in  his
left.  Seven  times  he  dipped  his  finger  in  it,  sprinkling  it
towards  the  Most  Holy  Place,  which  he  was  supposed  to  have
in  full  view  over  the  Porch  of  Solomon  or  through  the
eastern  gate.  Then,  immediately  descending,  he  kindled  the
fire.  As  soon  as  the  flames  burst  forth,  the  priest,  standing
outside  the  pit  in  which  the  pile  was  built  up,  took  cedarwood,
hyssop,  and  **  scarlet "  wool,  asking  three  times  as  he  held  up
each  :  "  Is  this  cedarwood  t  Is  this  hyssop  }  Is  this  scarlet }  "
so  as  to  call  to  the  memory  of  everyone  the  Divine  ordinance.
Then  tying  them  together  with  the  scarlet  wool,  he  thre.v
the  bundle  upon  the  burning  heifer.     The  burnt  remains  were

*  Farah,  iii.  iv.


On  Purifications.  311

beaten  into  ashes  by  sticks  or  stone  mallets  and  passed
through  coarse  sieves ;  then  divided  into  three  parts — one  ol
which  was  kept  in  the  Temple-terrace  (the  Chel),  the  other  on
the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  the  third  distributed  among  the
priesthood  throughout  the  land.

The  next  care  was  to  find  one  to  whom  no  suspicion  of
possible  defilement  could  attach,  who  might  administer  purifi-
cation to  such  as  needed  it.  For  this  purpose  a  priest  was
not  required;  but  any  one — even  a  child— was  fit  for  the  service.
In  point  of  fact,  according  to  Jewish  tradition,  children  were
exclusively  employed  in  this  ministry.  If  we  are  to  believe
the  Mishnah}  there  were  at  Jerusalem  certain  dwellings  built
upon  rocks,  that  were  hollowed  beneath,  so  as  to  render  im-
possible pollution  from  unknown  graves  beneath.  Here  the
children  destined  for  this  ministry  were  to  be  born,  and  here
they  were  reared  and  kept  till  fit  for  their  service.  Pecu-
liar precautions  were  adopted  in  leading  them  out  to  their
work.  The  child  was  to  ride  on  a  bullock,  and  to  mount  and
descend  it  by  boards.  He  was  first  to  proceed  to  the  pool  of
Siloam^  and  to  fill  a  stone  cup  with  its  water,  and  thence  to
ride  to  the  Temple  Mount,  which,  with  all  its  courts,  was  also
supposed  to  be  free  from  possible  pollutions  by  being  hollowed
beneath.  Dismounting,  he  would  approach  the  **  Beautiful
Gate,"  where  the  vessel  with  the  ashes  of  the  red  heifer  was
kept.  Next  a  goat  would  be  brought  out,  and  a  rope,  with  a
stick  attached  to  it,  tied  between  its  horns.  The  stick  was
put  into  the  vessel  with  the  ashes,  the  goat  driven  backwards,
and  of  the  ashes  thereby  spilt  the  child  would  take  for  use  in
the  sacred  service  so  much  as  to  be  visible  upon  the  water.

^  Parah^  iii.  2-5.

*  Or  Gihon.     According  to  Jewish  tradition,  the  kings  were  always  anointed
at  Siloam  (i  Kings  L  33,  38).


312       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

It  is  only  fair  to  add,  that  one  of  the  Mishnic  sages,  depreca-
ting a  statement  which  might  be  turned  into  ridicule  by  the
Sadducees,  declares  that  any  clean  person  might  take  with
his  hand  from  the  vessel  so  much  of  the  ashes  as  was  required
for  the  service.  The  purification  was  made  by  sprinkling  with
hyssop.  According  to  the  Rabbis,^  three  separate  stalks,  each
with  a  blossom  on  it,  were  tied  together,  and  the  tip  of  these
blossoms  dipped  into  the  water  of  separation,  the  hyssop  itself
being  grasped  while  sprinkling  the  unclean.  The  same  autho-
rities make  the  almost  incredible  assertion  that  altogether,  from
the  time  of  Moses  to  the  final  destruction  of  the  Temple,  only
seven,  or  else  nine,  such  red  heifers  had  been  offered :  the  first
by  Moses,  the  second  by  Ezra,  and  the  other  five,  or  else  seven,
between  the  time  of  Ezra  and  that  of  the  taking  of  Jerusalem
by  the  Romans.  We  only  add  that  the  cost  of  this  sacrifice,
which  was  always  great,  since  a  pure  red  heifer  was  very  rare,^
was  defrayed  from  the  Temple  treasury,  as  being  offered  for  the
whole  people.^  Those  who  lived  in  the  country  would,  for
purification  from  defilement  by  the  dead,  come  up  to  Jerusalem
seven  days  before  the  great  festivals,  and,  as  part  of  the  ashes
were  distributed  among  the  priesthood,  there  could  never  be
any  difficulty  in  purifying  houses  or  vessels.

2.  After  what  has  already  been  explained,  it  is  not  neces-
sary to  enter  into  details  about  the  purijication  of  the  leper ^  for

^  Parak^  xi.  9.

*  It  might  be  purchased  even  from  non-Israelites,  and  the  Talmud  relates  a
curious  story,  showing  at  the  same  time  the  reward  of  filial  piety,  and  the/adtilous
amount  which  it  is  supposed  such  a  red  heifer  might  fetch.

3  Philo  erroneously  states  that  the  high-priest  was  sprinkled  with  it  each  time
before  ministering  at  the  altar.  The  truth  is,  he  was  only  so  sprinkled  in  preva»*a-
tion  for  the  Day  of  Atonement,  in  case  he  might  have  been  unwittingly  defiled.
Is  the  Romish  use  of  *'holy  water"  derived  from  Jewish  purificatioits  or  from  the
Greek  heathen  practice  of  sprinkling  on  entering  a  temple?


On  Pttrifications.  313

which  this,  indeed,  is  not  the  place.  Leprosy  was  not  merely
the  emblem  of  sin,  but  of  death,  to  which,  so  to  speak,
it  stood  related,  as  does  our  actual  sinfulness  to  our  state  of
sin  and  death  before  God.  Even  a  Rabbinical  saying  ranks
lepers  with  those  who  may  be  regarded  as  dead.^  They
were  excluded  from  "  the  camp  of  Israel,"  by  which,  in  later
times,  the  Talmudists  understood  all  cities  walled  since  the
days  of  Joshua,  who  was  supposed  to  have  sanctified  them.
Lepers  were  not  allowed  to  go  beyond  their  proper  bounds,
on  pain  of  forty  stripes.  For,  every  place  which  a  leper
entered  was  supposed  to  be  defiled.  They  were,  however,
admitted  to  the  synagogues,  where  a  place  was  railed  off  for
them,  ten  handbreadths  high  and  four  cubits  wide,  on  condi-
tion of  their  entering  the  house  of  worship  before  the  rest
of  the  congregation,  and  leaving  it  after  them.^  It  was  but
natural  that  they  should  consort  together.  This  is  borne  out
by  such  passages  as  Luke  xvii.  12,  which  at  the  same  time
show  how  even  this  living  death  vanished  at  the  word  or  the
touch  of  the  Saviour.

The  Mishnic  tractate,  Negainty  enters  into  most  wearisome
details  on  the  subject  of  leprosy,  as  affecting  persons  or  things.
It  closes  by  describing  the  ceremonial  at  its  purification.  The
2i,qXm2\  judgment  as  to  the  existence  of  leprosy  always  belonged
to  the  priest,  though  he  might  consult  any  one  who  had  know-
ledge of  the  matter.  Care  was  to  be  taken  that  no  part
of  the  examination  fell  on  the  Sabbath,  nor  was  any  on
whom  the  taint  appeared  to  be  disturbed  either  during  his
marriage  week,  or  on  feast  days.^  Great  precautions  were
taken  to  render  the  examination  thorough.     It  was  not  to  be

^  The  other  three  classes  are  the  blind,    the  poor,   and   those  who  have  no
children.  *  Negaim,  xiii.  I2,  ^  j^egaim,  i.  4 ;  iii.  2.


314       The   Temple y  its  Ministry  and  Services.

proceeded  with  early  in  the  morning,  nor  "  between  the  even-
ings," nor  inside  the  house,  nor  on  a  cloudy  day,  nor  yet
during  the  glare  of  mid-day,  but  from  9  A.M.  to  12  o'clock
noon,  and  from  i  P.M.  to  3  P.M.  ;  according  to  Rabbi
Jehudah,  only  at  10  or  11  o'clock  A.M.,  and  at  2  and  3  o'clock
P.M.  The  examining  priest  must  neither  be  blind  of  an  eye,
nor  impaired  in  sight,  nor  might  he  pronounce  as  to  the  leprosy
of  his  own  kindred.^  For  further  caution,  judgment  was  not
to  be  pronounced  at  the  same  time  about  two  suspicious  spots,
whether  on  the  same  or  on  different  persons.^

A  very  curious  mistake  by  writers  on  typology  here  requires
passing  notice.  It  is  commonly  supposed^  that  Lev.  xiii.  12,  13,
refers  to  cases  of  true  leprosy,  so  that  if  a  person  had  pre-
sented himself  covered  with  leprosy  over  "all  his  flesh,"  *'from
his  head  even  to  his  foot,  wheresoever  the  priest  looketh,"  the
priest  was  to  pronounce  :  ''  he  is  clean."  If  this  interpretation
were  correct,  the  priest  would  have  had  to  declare  what  was
simply  untrue  !  And,  mark,  it  is  not  a  question  about  cleansing
one  who  had  been  a  leper,  but  about  declaring  such  an  one
clean,  that  is,  not  a  leper  at  all,  while  yet  the  malady  covered
his  whole  body  from  head  to  foot !  Nor  does  even  the  doc-
trinal analogy,  for  the  sake  of  which  this  strange  view  must
have  been  adopted,  hold  good.  For  to  confess  oneself,  or
even  to  present  oneself  as  wholly  covered  by  the  leprosy  of
sin,  is  not  yet  to  be  cleansed — that  requires  purification  by
the  blood  of  Christ.  Moreover,  the  Old  Testament  type
speaks  of  being  clean^  not  of  cleansing ;  of  being  non-leprous,

^  Negaim^  ii.  2,  3,  5.  2  2^egaim,  iii.  I.

*  All  popular  writers  on  typology  have  fallen  into  this  error.  Even  the  learned
Lightfoot  has  committed  it.  It  is  also  adopted  by  Mr.  Poole  in  Smith's  Diet  of  the
BibleX\\.  p.  94),  and  curiously  accounted  for  by  the  altogether  unfounded  hypothesis
that  the  law  **  imposed  segregation  "  only  **  while  the  disease  manifested  ac^^ivity  I "


On  Purifications,  315

not  of  being  purified  from  leprosy !  The  correct  interpreta-
tion of  Lev.  xiii.  12,  13  evidently  is,  that  an  eruption  having
the  symptoms  there  described  is  not  that  of  true  leprosy  at  alL^
But  where,  in  the  Divine  mercy,  one  really  leprous  had  been
restored,  the  law^  defined  what  was  to  be  done  for  his  "  puri-
fication." The  rites  are,  in  fact,  twofold— the  first,^  to  restore
him  to  fellowship  with  the  congregation  ;  the  other  to  intro-
duce him  anew  to  communion  with  God.*  In  both  respects
he  had  been  dead,  and  was  alive  again ;  and  the  new  life,  so
consecrated,  was  one  higher  than  the  old  could  ever  have
been.

This  will  appear  from  an  attentive  study  of  the  ceremonial  of
purification,  as  described  in  the  Mishnah}  The  priest  having
pronounced  the  former  leper  clean,  a  quarter  of  a  log  (the  log
rather  less  than  a  pint)  of  "  living  water  "  was  poured  into  an
earthenware  dish.  Then  two  "  clean  birds  *'  were  taken — the
Rabbis  say  two  sparrows^ — of  whom  one  was  killed  over  "the
living  water,"  so  that  the  blood  might  drop  into  it,  after
which  the  carcass  was  buried.  Next,  cedar-wood,  hyssop,
and  scarlet  wool  were  taken  and  tied  together  (as  at  the  burn-
ing of  the  red  heifer),  and  dipped,  along  with  the  living  bird,
which  was  seized  by  the  tips  of  his  wings  and  of  his  tail,  into
the  blood-stained  water,  when  the  person  to  be  purified  was
sprinkled  seven  times  on  the  back  of  his  hand,  or,  according,

^  Even  the  modified  view  of  Keil,  which  is  substantially  adopted  in  Kitto's
Encycl.  (3rd  edit.),  p.  812,  that  the  state  described  in  Lev.  xii.  12,  13,  "was  re-
garded as  indicative  of  the  crisis,  as  the  whole  evil  matter  thus  brought  to  the
surface  formed  itself  into  a  scale,  which  dried  and  peeled  oif,"  does  not  meet  the
requirements  of  the  text.

*  Lev.  xiv.  3  Ley^  ^iv.  1-9.

*  Lev.  xiv.  10-20.  *  Negaim,  xiii.

®  May  not  our  Saviour  refer  to  this  when  He  speaks  of  "  sparrows  "  as  of  market-'
able  value  :  **  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  one  farthing"  (Matt.  x.  29)  ?


3i6      The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

to  others,  on  his  forehead.  Upon  this  the  living  bird  was  set
free,  neither  towards  the  sea,  nor  towards  the  city,  nor  towards
the  wilderness,  but  towards  the  fields.  Finally,  the  leper  had
all  the  hair  on  his  body  shorn  with  a  razor,  after  which  he
washed  his  clothes,  and  bathed,  when  he  was  clean,  though
still  interdicted  his  house ^  for  seven  days.

The  first  stage  of  purification  had  now  been  completed,  and
the  seven  days'  seclusion  served  as  preparation  for  the  second
stage.  The  former  might  take  place  anywhere,  but  the  latter
required  the  attendance  of  the  purified  leper  in  the  sanctuary.
It  began  on  the  seventh  day  itself,  when  the  purified  leper  had
again  all  his  hair  shorn,  as  at  the  first,  washed  his  clothes,  and
bathed.  The  Mishiah  remarks^  that  three  classes  required
this  legal  tonsure  of  all  hair — lepers,  Nazarites,  and  the
Levites  at  their  consecration — a  parallel  this  between  the
purified  lepers  and  the  Levites,  which  appears  even  more
clearly  in  their  being  anointed  on  the  head  with  oil,^  and  which
was  intended  to  mark  that  their  new  life  was  higher  than  the
old,  and  that,  like  Levi,  they  were  to  be  specially  dedicated
to  God.^  Though  not  of  any  special  importance,  we  may  add
that,  according  to  the  Mishiah,  as  in  the  analogous  case  of
the  two  goats  for  the  Day  of  Atonement,  the  two  birds  for  the
leper  were  to  be  of  precisely  the  same  colour,  size,  and  value,
and,  if  possible,  bought  on  the  same  day — to  mark  that  the
two  formed  integral  parts  of  one  and  the  same  service;  the
cedar-wood  was  to  be  one  cubit  long  and  "  the  quarter  of  a
bedpost "  thick  ;  the  hyssop  of  the  common  kind,  that  is,  not
such  as  had  any  other  bye-name,  as  Grecian,  Roman,  orna-
mental, or  wild  ;  while  the  scarlet  wool  was  to  be  a  shekel's

*  The  Mishnah  and  all  commentators  apply  this  to  conjugal  intercourse.

*  Negaim  xiv.  4.  ^  Lev.  xiv.  29.

*  The  significance  of  anointing  the  head  with  oil  is  sufficiently  knowxL


Oft  Purifications.  317

weight.    The  rest  of  the  ceremonial  we  give  in  the  words  of

the  Mishnah  itself^: — "On  the  eighth  day  the  leper  brings

three  sacrifices — a  sin-,  a  trespass-,  and  a  burnt-offering,  and

the  poor  brings  a  sin-  and  a  burnt-offering  of  a  bird.     He

stands  before  the  trespass-offering,  lays  his  hands  upon  it,

and  kills  it.     Two  priests  catch  up  the  blood — one  in  a  vessel,

the  other  in  his  hand.    He  who  catches  it  up  in  the  vessel  goes

and  throws  it  on  the  side  of  the  altar,  and  he  who  catches  it

in  his  hand  goes  and  stands  before  the  leper.     And  the  leper

who  had  previously  bathed  in  the  court  of  the  lepers,  goes

and  stands  in  the  gate  of  Nicanor.     Rabbi  Jehudah  says : —

He   needs  not  to  bathe.     He  thrusts  in  his  head  (viz.,  into

the  great  court  which  he  may  not  yet  enter),  and  the  priest

puts  of  the  blood  upon  the  tip  of  his  ear ;  he  thrusts  in  his

hand,  and  he  puts  it  upon  the  thumb  of  his  hand  ;  he  thrusts

in  his  foot,  and  he  puts  it  upon  the  great  toe  of  his  foot.   Rabbi

Jehudah  says : — He  thrusts  in   the  three  at  the  same   time.

If  he  have  lost  his  thumb,  great  toe,  or  right  ear,  he  cannot

ever  be  cleansed.     Rabbi  Eliezer  says  : — The  priest  puts  it

on  the  spot  where  it  had  been.     Rabbi  Simeon  says : — If  it

be  applied  on  the  corresponding  left  side  of  the  leper's  body,

it  sufficeth.     The  priest  now  takes  from  the  log  of  oil  and

pours  it  into  the  palm  of  his  colleague — though,  if  he  poured

it  into  his  own  it  were  valid.    He  dips  his  finger  and  sprinkles

seven  times  towards  the  Holy  of  Holies,  dipping  each  time  he

sprinkles.     He  goes  before  the  leper  ;  and  on  the  spot  where

he  had  put  the  blood  he  puts  the  oil,  as  it  is  written,  *  upon

the  blood  of  the  trespass-offering.'     And  the  remnant  of  the

oil  that  is  in  the  priest's  hand,  he  pours  on  the  head  of  him

that  is  to  be  cleansed,  for  an  atonement ;  if  he  so  puts  it,  he  is

*  Negaifn^  xiv.  7,  etc.


3i8        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

atoned  for,  but  if  not,  he  is  not  atoned  for.  So  Rabbi  Akiba.
Rabbi  Jochanan,  the  son  of  Nuri,  saith  : — This  is  only  the
remnant  of  the  ordinance — whether  it  is  done  or  not,  the
atonement  is  made ;  but  they  impute  it  to  him  (the  priest  ?)
as  if  he  had  not  made  atonement."

3.  It  still  remains  to  describe  the  peculiar  ceremonial  con-
nected with  the  purification  of  a  wife  from  the  suspicion  of
adultery.  Strictly  speaking,  there  was  no  real  offering  con-
nected with  this.  The  rites  ^  consisted  of  two  parts,  in  the  first  of
which  the  woman  in  her  wave-offering  solemnly  commended
her  ways  to  the  Holy  Lord  God  of  Israel,  thus  professing
innocence  ;  while  in  the  second,  she  intimated  her  readiness
to  abide  the  consequences  of  her  profession  and  appeal  to
God.  Both  acts  were  symbolical,  nor  did  either  of  them
imply  anything  like  an  ordeal  The  meat-offering  which
she  brought  in  her  hand  symbolised  her  works,  the  fruit  of
her  life.  But  owing  to  the  fact  that  her  life  was  open  to
suspicion,  it  was  brought,  not  of  wheat,  as  on  other  occa-
sions, but  of  barley-flour,  which  constituted  the  poorest
fare,  while,  for  the  same  reason,  the  customary  addition  of
oil  and  frankincense  was  omitted.  Before  this  offering  was
waved  and  part  of  it  burned  on  the  altar,  the  priest  had  to
^v^xn  the  woman  of  the  terrible  consequences  of  a  false  pro-
fession before  the  Lord,  and  to  exhibit  what  he  spoke  in  a
symbolical  act.  He  wrote  the  words  of  the  curse  upon  a
roll ;  then,  taking  water  out  of  the  laver,  in  which  the  daily
impurities  of  the  priests  were,  so  to  speak,  symbolically
cleansed,  and  putting  into  it  dust  of  the  sanctuary,  he  washed
in  this  mixture  the  writing  of  the  curses,  which  were  de-
nounced upon  the  special  sin  of  v/hich  she  was  suspected.

^  Numb.  V.  U-31.


On  Purifications.  319

And  the  woman,  having  by  a  repeated  Amen  testified  that
she  had  quite  apprehended  the  meaning  of  the  whole,  and
that  she  made  her  solemn  appeal  to  God,  was  then  in  a
symbolical  act  to  do  two  things.  First,  she  presented  in  her
meat-offering,  which  the  priest  waved,  her  life  to  the  heart-
searching  God,  and  then,  prepared  for  the  consequences  of
her  appeal,  she  drank  the  bitter  mixture  of  the  threatened
curses,  assured  that  it  could  do  no  harm  to  her  who  was
innocent,  whereas,  if  guilty,  she  had  appealed  to  God^  judg-
ment would  certainly  at  some  time  overtake  her,  and  that  in
a  manner  corresponding  to  the  sin  which  she  had  committed.
According  to  the  Mishnah^  which  devotes  to  this  subject
a  special  tractate  {Sotah),  a  wife  could  not  be  brought  to  this
solemn  trial  unless  her  husband  have  previously  warned  her,
in  presence  of  two  witnesses,  against  intercourse  with  one
whom  he  suspected,  and  also  two  witnesses  had  reported  that
she  had  contravened  his  injunction.  The  Rabbis,  moreover,
insist  that  the  command  must  have  been  express,  that  it  only
applied  to  intercourse  out  of  reach  of  public  view,  and  that
the  husband's  charge  to  his  wife  before  witnesses  should  be
preceded  by  private  and  loving  admonition.^  But  if,  after  all
this,  she  had  left  such  warning  unheeded,  her  husband  had
first  to  bring  her  before  the  Sanhedrim  of  his  own  place,
who  would  dispatch  two  of  their  scholars  with  the  couple  to
Jerusalem,  where  they  were  to  appear  before  ths;'  Great
Sanhedrim.  The  first  endeavour  of  that  tribunal  wa*»  to
bring  the  accused  by  any  means  to  make  confessioi^*  If  she
did  so,  she  only  lost  what  her  husband  had  settled  upon  her,

*  The  tractate  Sotah  enters  into  every  possible  detail,  with  prurient  casuistry
— the  tendency,  as  always  in  Jewish  criminal  law,  being  in  favour  of  the
accused.


320       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

but  retained  her  own  portion.^  If  she  persisted  in  her  inno
cence,  she  was  brought  through  the  eastern  gate  of  the
Temple,  and  placed  at  the  gate  of  Nicanor,  where  the
priest  tore  off  her  dress  to  her  bosom,  and  dishevelled  her
hair.  If  she  wore  a  white  dress,  she  was  covered  with  black  ;
if  she  had  ornaments,  they  were  taken  from  her,  and  a  rope
put  round  her  neck.  Thus  she  stood,  exposed  to  the  gaze  of
all,  except  her  own  parents.  All  this  to  symbolise  the
Scriptural  warning  :  ^  "  Therefore  I  will  measure  their  former
work  into  their  bosom,'*  for  in  what  had  been  her  pride  and
her  temptation  she  was  now  exposed  to  shame.  The  priest
was  to  write,  in  ink,  Numb.  v.  19-22,  of  course  leaving  out  the
introductory  clauses  in  verses  19  and  21,  and  the  conclud-
ing '*  Amen."  The  woman's  double  response  of  Amen  bore
reference  first  to  her  innocence,  and  secondly  to  the  threatened
curse.  The  waving  of  the  woman's  offering  was  done  in  the
usual  manner,  but  opinions  differ  whether  she  had  to  drink
"  the  bitter  water  "  before  or  after  part  of  her  offering  had  been
burned  on  the  altar.  If  before  the  writing  was  washed  into
the  water  she  refused  to  take  the  test,  her  offering  was
scattered  among  the  ashes  ;  similarly,  if  she  confessed  herself
guilty.  But  if  she  insisted  on  her  innocence  after  the  writing
was  washed,  she  was  forced  to  drink  the  water.  The  Divine
judgment  was  supposed  to  overtake  the  guilty  sooner  or  later,
as  some  thought,  according  to  their  other  works.  The  wave-
offering  belonged  to  the  priest,  except  where  the  suspected
woman  was  the  wife  of  a  priest,  in  which  case  the  offering

^  According  to  Rabbinical  law  adulteresses  only  suffered  death  if  they  persisted
in  the  actual  crime  after  having  been  warned  of  the  consequences  by  two  witnesses.
It  is  evident  that  this  canon  must  have  rendered  the  infliction  of  the  death  penalty
the  rarest  exception — indeed,  almost  inconceivable.

•  Isaiah  Ixv.  7,


On  Purifications.  321

was  burned.^  If  a  husband  were  deaf  or  insane,  or  in  prison,
the  magistrates  of  the  place  would  act  in  his  stead  in  insisting
on  a  woman  clearing  herself  of  just  suspicion.  An  adulteress
was  prohibited  from  living  with  her  seducer.  It  is  beside  our
purpose  further  to  enter  into  the  various  legal  determinations
of  the  Misknah.  But  it  is  stated  that,  with  the  decline  of
morals  in  Palestine,  the  trial  by  the  *' water  of  jealousy"
gradually  ceased  (in  accordance  with  what  we  read  in  Hos.  iv.
14),  till  it  was  finally  abolished  by  Rabbi  Jochanan,  the  son  of
Zacchai,  some  time  after  the  death  of  our  Lord.^  While  re-
cording this  fact  the  Mishnah  ^  traces,  in  bitter  language,  the
decay  and  loss  of  what  had  been  good  and  precious  to  Israel
in  their  worship,  Temple,  wisdom,  and  virtues,  pointing  for-
ward to  the  yet  greater  sorrow  of  "the  last  day,"  "shortly
before  the  coming  of  Messiah/'  when  all  authority,  obedience,
and  fear  of  God  would  decline  in  the  earth,  and  "  our  only
hope  and  trust"  could  spring  from  looking  up  to  our  heavenly
Father.  Yet  beyond  it  stands  out,  in  the  closing  words  of  this
tractate  in  the  Mishnahy  the  final  hope  of  a  revival,  of  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  of  the  blessed  resurrection,  all
connected  with  the  long-expected  ministry  of  Elijah  !

^  The  Mishnah  defines  particularly  the  cases  in  which  the  trial  by  bitter  waters
was  inapplicable.

2  Not,  as  Dr.  Farrar  states  (The  Life  of  Christy  ii.  65)  long  before  it.  He
regards  the  decay  of  morals  at  the  time  of  Christ  as  so  universal  and  great,  that
among  the  accusers  of  the  woman  taken  in  adultery  there  was  not  one  '*  free  from
the  taint  of  this  class  of  sins."  I  am  thankful  to  say,  that  so  sweeping  a  charge  is
not  in  anywise  borne  out  by  historical  evidence.

'  Sotah^  ix.  9-15,


CHAPTER    XIX.

ON    VOWS.

THE  NAZARITE'S  VOW — ^THE  OFFERING  OF  FIRST-FRUITS  IN  THE  TEMPLE.

**  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  sleep."
.  .  .  .  "These  were  purchased  from  among  men — the  first-fruits  unto
God  and  to  the  Lamb."--i  CoR.  xV.  20 ;  Rev.  xiv.  4.

"  TF  a  man  vow  a  vow  unto  Jehovah,  or  swear  an  oath
-L  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  bond,  he  shall  not  pro-
fane his  word  ;  he  shall  do  according  to  all  that  hath
proceeded  out  of  his  mouth."  ^  These  words  establish  the
lawfulness  of  vows,  define  their  character,  and  declare  their
inviolableness.  At  the  outset  a  distinction  is  here  made
between  a  positive  and  a  negative  vow,  an  undertaking  and
a  renunciation,  a  Neder  and  an  Issar,  In  the  former  *'a
man  vowed  a  vow  unto  Jehovah" — that  is,  he  consecrated
unto  Him  some  one  or  more  persons  or  things,  which  he  ex-
pressly designated ;  in  the  latter  he  "  swore  an  oath  to  bind
his  soul  with  a  bond  " — that  is,  he  renounced  the  use  of  cer-
tain things,  binding  himself  to  abstinence  from  them.  The
renunciation  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine  would  seem  to  place  the
Nazarite's  vow  in  the  class  termed  Issar.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  there  was,  as  in  the  case  of  Samson  and  Samuel,  also

^  Numb.  XXX.  2,


On   Vows.  323

such  positive  dedication  to  the  Lord,  and  such  other  provisions
as  seem  to  make  the  Nazarite's  the  vow  of  vows — that  is,  the
full  carrying  out  of  the  idea  of  a  vow,  alike  in  its  positive
and  negative  aspects — being,  in  fact,  a  voluntary  and  entire
surrender  unto  Jehovah,  such  as,  in  its  more  general  bearing,
the  Aaronic  priesthood  had  been  intended  to  express.

It  lies  on  the  surface,  that  all  vows  were  limited  by
higher  obhgations.  A  man  could  not  have  vowed  anything
that  was  not  fairly  his  own ;  hence,  according  to  the
Mishnah^  neither  what  of  his  fortune  he  owed  to  others,  nor  his
widow's  portion,  nor  yet  what  already  of  right  belonged  unto
the  Lord  ;  ^  nor  might  he  profane  the  Temple  by  bringing  to
the  altar  the  reward  of  sin  or  of  unnatural  crime.^  Similarly,
the  Rabbinical  law  declared  any  vow  of  abstinence  ipso
facto  invalid,  if  it  interfered  with  the  preservation  of  life  or
similar  obligations,  and  it  allowed  divorce  to  a  woman  if  her
husband's  vow  curtailed  her  liberty  or  her  rights.  On  this
ground  it  was  that  Christ  showed  the  profaneness  of  the  tradi-
tional law,  which  virtually  sanctioned  transgression  of  the
command  to  honour  father  and  mother,  by  pronouncing  over
that  by  which  they  might  have  been  profited  the  magic  word
CorbaUy  which  dedicated  it  to  the  Temple.^  In  general,  the
Rabbinical  ordinances  convey  the  impression,  on  the  one  hand,
of  a  desire  to  limit  the  obligation  of  vows,  and,  on  the  other,  of
extreme  strictness  where  a  vow  had  really  been  made.  Thus  a
vow  required  to  have  been  expressly  spoken,  yet  if  the  words
used  had  been  even  intentionally  so  chosen  as  afterwards  to
open  a  way  of  escape,  or  were  such  as  connected  themselves
with  the  common  form  of  a  vow,  they  conveyed  its  obliga-

1  Numb.  XXX.  26-28.

2  This  is  undoubtedly  the  meaning  of  th«  expression   "price  of  a  dog"  in
Deut.  xxiii.  18.  ^  Mark  vii.  11-13.


324       The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services,

tions.  In  all  such  cases  goods  might  be  distrained  to  secure
the  performance  of  the  vow ;  the  law,  however,  providing
that  the  recusant  was  to  be  allowed  to  retain  food  for  a
month,  a  year's  clothing,  his  beds  and  bedding,  and,  if  an
artisan,  his  necessary  tools.  In  the  case  of  women,  a  father
or  husband  had  the  right  to  annul  a  vow,  provided  he  did  so
immediately  on  hearing  it.^  All  persons  vowed  unto  the  Lord
had  to  be  redeemed  according  to  a  certain  scale  ;  which,
in  the  case  of  the  poor,  was  to  be  so  lowered  as  to  bring
It  within  reach  of  their  means.^  Such  "  beasts "  "  whereof
men  bring  an  offering,*'  went  to  the  altar ;  all  others,  as  well
as  any  other  thing  dedicated,  was  to  be  valued  by  the  priest,
and  might  be  redeemed  on  payment  of  the  price,  together
with  one-fifth  additional,  or  else  was  sold  for  behoof  of  the
Temple  treasury.^  How  carefully  the  law  guarded  against
all  profanity,  or  from  the  attempt  to  make  merit  out  of
what  should  have  been  the  free  outgoing  of  believing  hearts,
appears  from  Deut.  xxiii.  22-24,  Lev.  xxvii.  9,  10,  and  such
statements  as  Pro  v.  xx.  25.  As  Scriptural  instances  of
vows,  we  may  mention  that  of  Jacob,*  the  rash  vow  of
Jephthah,^  the  vow  of  Hannah,^  the  pretended  vow  of  Absalom,^
and  the  vows  of  the  sailors  who  cast  Jonah  overboard.^  On
the  other  hand,  it  will  be  understood  how  readily,  in  times  of
religious  declension,  vows  might  be  turned  from  their  proper
object  to  purposes  contrary  to  the  Divine  mind.^

*  Numb.  XXX.  3-8.

2  Lev.  xxvii.  2-8.  The  Mishnak  declares  that  this  scale  was  only  applicable,  if
express  reference  had  been  made  to  it  in  the  vr  w  ;  otherwise  the  price  of  redemp-
tion was,  what  the  person  would  have  fetched  if  sold  in  the  market  as  a  slave.

*  Lev.  xMvii.  11-27.  ^  Gen.  xxviii.  20.  ^  Judges  xi.  30,  31.

•  I  Sam.  i.  II.  "^2  Sam.  xv.  7,  8.  ^  Jon.  i.  16.

•  lu  general  the  later  legislation  of  the  Rabbis  was  intended  to  discourage  vows,


On   Vows.  325

In  the  latter  times  of  the  Temple  such  vows,  made  either
thoughtlessly,  or  from  Pharisaical  motives,  became  painfully  fre-
quent, and  called  forth  protests  on  the  part  of  those  who  viewed
them  in  a  more  reverent  and  earnest  spirit.  Thus  it  is  said,^  that
the  high-priest,  Simeon  the  Just— to  whom  tradition  ascribes  so
much  that  is  good  and  noble — declared  that  he  had  uniformly
refused,  except  in  one  instance,  to  partake  of  the  trespass-offer-
ing of  Nazarites,  since  such  vows  were  so  often  made  rashly,
and  the  sacrifice  was  afterwards  offered  reluctantly,  not  with
pious  intent  A  fair  youth,  with  beautiful  hair,  had  presented
himself  for  such  a  vow,  with  whom  the  high-priest  had  ex-
postulated :  *'My  son,  what  could  have  induced  thee  to  destroy
such  splendid  hair  ?  '*  To  which  the  youth  replied  :  ''  I  fed  my
father's  flock,  and  as  I  was  about  to  draw  water  for  it  from  a
brook,  I  saw  my  wraith,  and  the  evil  spirit  seized  and  would
have  destroyed  me  (probably  by  vanity).  Then  I  exclaimed :
Miserable  fool,  why  boastest  thou  in  a  possession  which  does
not  belong  to  thee,  who  art  so  soon  to  be  the  portion  of  maggots
and  worms.  By  the  Temple  !  I  cut  off  my  hair,  to  devote
it  to  God."  *'  Upon  this,"  said  Simeon^  "  I  rose  and  kissed
him  on  the  forehead,  saying,  Oh  that  many  in  Israel  were
like  thee !  Thou  hast  truly,  and  in  the  spirit  of  the  law,
made  this  vow  according  to  the  will  of  God."

That  great  abuses  crept  in  appears  even  from  the  large
numbers  who  took  them.      Thus  the  Talmud  records   that,


on  account  of  their  frequent  abuse  (Nedar.  i.,  iii.,  ix.).  It  was  declared  that  only
evil-doers  bound  themselves  in  this  manner,  while  the  pious  gave  of  their  own  free-
will. Where  a  vow  affected  the  interests  of  others,  every  endeavour  was  to  be
made,  to  get  him  who  had  made  it,  to  seek  absolution  from  its  obligations,  which
might  be  had  from  one  '*sage,"  or  from  three  persons,  in  the  presence  of  him  who
had  been  affected  by  the  vow.  Further  particulars  are  beyond  our  present  scope.
^  See  the  Talmudical  story  in  Jost,  vol.  i.  pp.  171,  172


326        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

in  the  days  of  King  Jannai  no  fewer  than  300  Nazarites
presented  themselves  before  Simeon,  the  son  of  Shetach.
Moreover,  a  sort  of  traffic  in  good  works,  Hke  that  in  the
Romish  Church  before  the  Reformation,  was  carried  on.  It
was  considered  meritorious  to  '*  be  at  charges"  for  poor
Nazarites,  and  to  defray  the  expenses  of  their  sacrifices.
King  Agrippa,  on  arriving  at  Jerusalem,  seems  to  have  done
this  to  conciliate  popular  favour.^  A  far  holier  motive  than
this  influenced  St.  Paul,^  when,  to  remove  the  prejudices
of  Jewish  Christians,  he  was  "at  charges*'  for  four  poor
Christian  Nazarites,  and  joined  them,  as  it  were,  in  their  vow
by  taking  upon  himself  some  of  its  obligations,  as,  indeed,
he  was  allowed  to  do  by  the  traditional  law.

I.  The  law  concerning  the  Nazarite  vow^  seems  to  imply,
that  it  had  been  an  institution  already  existing  at  the  time  of
Moses,  which  was  only  further  defined  and  regulated  by  him.
The  name,  as  well  as  its  special  obligations,  indicate  its  higher
bearing.  For  the  term  Nazir  is  evidently  derived  from  nazar^
to  separate,  and  "the  vow  of  a  Nazarite"  was  to  separate  himself
unto  Jehovah.*  Hence  the  Nazarite  was  "holy  unto  Jehovah.^"
In  the  sense  of  separation  the  term  Nazir  was  applied  to
Joseph,^  and  so  the  root  is  frequently  used.  But,  besides  sepa-
ration and  holiness,  we  have  also  here  the  idea  of  royal priesU
hoody  since  the  word  Nezer  is  applied  to  "the  holy  crown  upon
the  mitre  "  of  the  high-priest,^  and  "  the  crown  of  the  anoint-
ing oil,"  ^  as  also,  in  a  secondary  sense,  to  the  royal  crov^^n.^

^  Jos.,  Antiq.  xix.  6,  I.  *  Acts  xxi.  23,  etc  '  Numb.  vi.

*  Numb.  vi.  2.  ^  Numb.  vi.  8.

®  Gen.  xlix.  26;  comp.  Deut.  xxxii.  16.

'  Ex.  xxix.  6;  xxxix.  30;  Lev.  viii.  9.  ^  Lev.  xxi.  12.

^  2   Sam.   i.    10 ;   2  Kings  xi.   12  ;    Zech.   ix.   16.     The  learned  writer  of  the
article  **  Nazarite  '*  in  Kitto's  EncycL  regards  the  meaning  "  diadem  "  as  the  funda-


On  Vows.  327

We  have,  therefore,  in  the  Nazarite,  the  three  ideas  of  separa-
tion, holiness,  and  the  crown  of  the  royal  priesthood,  all  closely-
connected.  With  this  agree  the  threefold  obligations  incum-
bent on  a  Nazarite.  He  was  to  be  not  only  a  priest,  but  one  in
a  higher  and  more  intense  sense,  since  he  became  such  by
personal  consecration  instead  of  by  mere  bodily  descent.  If  the
priest  was  to  abstain  from  wine  during  his  actual  ministration
in  the  sanctuary,  the  Nazarite  must  during  the  whole  period
of  his  vow  refrain  from  all  that  belongs  to  the  fruit  of  the
vine,  **  from  the  kernels  even  to  the  husk."  ^  A  priest  was  to
avoid  all  defilement  from  the  dead,  except  in  the  case  of  his
nearest  relatives,  but  the  Nazarite,  like  the  high-priest,^  was
to  ignore  in  that  respect  even  father  and  mother,  brother  and
sister.^  Nay  more,  if  unwittingly  he  had  become  so  defiled,  the
time  of  his  vow,  which  had  already  elapsed,  was  to  count  for
nothing  ;  after  the  usual  seven  days'  purification,*  he  was  to
cut  off  his  hair,  which,  in  that  case,  was  buried,  not  burnt,
and  on  the  eighth  day  to  bring  two  turtle-doves,  or  two
young  pigeons,  the  one  for  a  sin-,  the  other  for  a  burnt-offering,
with  a  lamb  of  the  first  year  for  a  trespass-offering  ;  after
which  he  had  to  commence  his  Nazarite  vow  anew.  Lastly,  if
the  high-priest  wore  "  the  holy  Nezer  upon  the  mitre,'*  the
Nazarite  was  not  to  cut  his  hair,  which  was  "  the  Nezer  of  his

mental  one,  following  in  this  the  somewhat  unsafe  critical  guidance  of  Saalschiitz,
Mos.  Recht.f  p.  158.  In  proof,  he  appeals  to  the  circumstance  that  the  *' undressed
vine  "  of  the  Sabbatical  and  the  Jubilee  year  is  designated  by  the  term  **  Nazir  "  in
Lev.  XXV.  5,  II.  But  evidently  the  uncut,  untrimmed  vine  of  those  years  derived
its  designation  from  the  Nazarite  with  his  untrimmed  hair,  and  not  mce  versd^
Some  of  the  Rabbis  have  imagined,  that  the  vine  had  grown  in  Paradise,  and  that
somehow  the  Nazarite's  abstinence  from  its  fruit  was  connected  with  the  paradisi-
acal state,  and  with  our  fall.

1  Numb.  vi.  3,  4.  ^  Lev.  xxi.  II.  '  Numb.  vL  7.

*  Numb.  xix.  Il,  12.


328        The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

God  upon  his  head/'^  And  this  use  of  the  word  Nezer,  as
applied  to  the  high-priest's  crown,  as  well  as  to  the  separation
unto  holiness  of  the  Nazarite,  casts  additional  light  alike  upon
the  object  of  the  priesthood  and  the  character  of  the  Nazarite
vow.

According  to  the  Mishnah^  all  epithets  of,  or  allusions  to,
the  Nazarite  vow,  carried  its  obligation.  Thus  if  one  said,
**  I  will  be  it !  or,  I  will  be  a  beautiful  one  !  " — with  reference
to  the  long  hair — or  made  any  similar  allusion,  he  had  legally
taken  upon  him  the  vow.  If  taken  for  an  indefinite  period,
or  without  express  declaration  of  the  time,  the  vow  lasted  for
thirty  days,  which  was  the  shortest  possible  time  for  a
Nazarite.  There  were,  however,  "perpetual  Nazarites/'  the
Mishnah  distinguishing  between  an  ordinary  "perpetual
Nazarite  "  and  a  "  Samson-Nazarite,"  Both  were  "  for  life,"  but
the  former  was  allowed  occasionally  to  shorten  his  hair,  after
which  he  brought  the  three  sacrifices.  He  could  also  be  defiled
by  the  dead,  in  which  case  he  had  to  undergo  the  prescribed
purification.  But  as  Samson  had  not  been  allowed  under  any
circumstances  to  poll  his  hair,  and  as  he  evidently  had  come
into  contact  with  death  without  afterwards  undergoing  any
ceremonial,^  so  the  Samson-Nazarite  might  neither  shorten  his
hair,  nor  could  he  be  defiled  by  the  dead.  However,  practically
such  a  question  probably  never  arose,  and  the  distinction  was
no  doubt  merely  made  to  meet  an  exegetical  necessity  to  the
Jews, — that  of  vindicating  the  conduct  of  Samson!  As  already
stated,  another  might  undertake  part   or  the  whole  of  the

*  Numb.  vL  7.

*  Tractate  Nazir,  We  again  omit  such  details,  which,  though  important  as  legal
determinations,  would  not  advance  our  knowledge  as  to  the  mode  in  which  the
Nazarite  was  discharged  of  his  vow  in  the  Temple.

3  Judges  xiv.  8  ;  xv.  15*


On   Vows.  329

charges  of  a  Nazarite,  and  thus  share  in  his  vow.^  A  father,
but  not  a  mother,  might  make  a  Nazarite  vow  for  a  son,  while
he  was  under  the  legal  age  of  thirteen.  The  Mishnali^  discusses
at  great  length  the  three  things  interdicted  to  a  Nazarite  :  "  de-
filement, cutting  the  hair,  and  whatever  proceedeth  from  the
vine."  Any  wilful  trespass  in  these  respects,  provided  the
Nazarite  had  been  expressly  warned,  carried  the  punishment
of  stripes,  and  that  for  every  individual  act  of  which  he  had
been  so  warned.

To  prevent  even  the  accidental  removal  of  hair,  the  Rabbis
forbade  the  use  of  a  comb.^  According  to  the  Law,  defilement
from  death  annulled  the  previous  time  of  the  vow,  and  necessi-
tated certain  offerings.  To  this  the  Mishnah  adds,  that  if
anyhow  the  hair  were  cut,  it  annulled  the  previous  time  of  a
vow  up  to  thirty  days  (the  period  of  an  indefinite  vow),  while
it  is  curiously  determined  that  the  use  of  anything  coming
from  the  vine  did  not  interrupt  the  vow.  Another  Rabbinical
contravention  of  the  spirit  of  the  law  was  to  allow  Nazarites
the  use  of  all  intoxicating  liquors  other  than  what  came  from
the  vine  (such  as  palm- wine,  etc.).  Lastly,  the  Mishnah
determines  ^  that  a  master  could  not  annul  the  Nazarite  vow
of  his  slave  ;  and  that,  if  he  prevented  him  from  observing  it,
the  slave  was  bound  to  renew  it  on  attaining  his  liberty.  The
off'erings  of  a  Nazarite  on  the  completion  of  his  vow  are
explicitly  described  in  Numb.  vi.  13-21.  Along  with  the
"ram  without  blemish  for  peace-offerings,"  he  had  to  bring
"  a  basket  of  unleavened  bread,  cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with
oil,  and  wafers  of  unleavened  bread  anointed  with  oil,"  as  well
as  the  ordinary  '*  meat-offering  and   their   drink-offerings." »

1  Naz.  ii.  5,  6.  «  J^az,  vi.  ^  J^az.  vi.  3.

*  Naz,  IX.  I.  *  Numb,  vi.  14,  15.


330        The  Temphy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

The  Rabbis  explain,  that  the  *'  unleavened  bread,"  to  accom-
pany **  the  peace-offerings/'  was  to  be  made  of  six-tenth  deals
and  two-thirds  of  a  tenth  deal  of  flour,  which  were  to  be  baked
into  ten  unleavened  cakes  and  ten  unleavened  wafers,  all
anointed  with  the  fourth  part  of  a  log  of  oil ;  and  that  all  this
*'  bread  "  was  to  be  offered  in  one  vessel,  or  "  basket."  ^  The
sin-offering  was  first  brought,  then  the  burnt-,  and  last  of  all
the  peace-offering.  In  the  Court  of  the  Women  there  was  a
special  Nazarite's  chamber.  After  the  various  sacrifices  had
been  offered  by  the  priest,  the  Nazarite  retired  to  this
chamber,  where  he  boiled  the  flesh  of  his  peace-offerings,  cut
off  his  hair,  and  threw  it  in  the  fire  under  the  caldron.  If  he
had  already  cut  off  his  hair  before  coming  to  Jerusalem,  he
must  still  bring  it  with  him,  and  cast  it  in  the  fire  under  the
caldron  ;  so  that  whether  or  not  we  understand  Acts  xviii.  i8,
as  stating  that  Paul  himself  had  taken  a  vow,  he  might  have
cut  off  his  hair  at  Cenchrea,^  and  brought  it  with  him  to  Jeru-
salem. After  that  the  priest  waved  the  offering,  as  detailed
in  Numb.  vi.  19,  20,*^  and  the  fat  was  salted,  and  burned
upon  the  altar.  The  breast,  the  fore-leg,  the  boiled  shoulder,
and  the  waved  cake  and  wafer,  belonged  to  the  priests — the
remaining  bread  and  meat  were  eaten  by  the  Nazarite.
Lastly,  the  expression,  "  besides  that  that  his  hand  shall  get,"
after  mention  of  the  other  offerings,*  seems  to  imply  that  the
Nazarites  were  also  wont  to  bring  free-will  offerings.

Scripture  mentions  three  Nazarites  for  life :  Samson,
Samuel,  and  John  the  Baptist,  to  which  Christian  tradition
adds  the  name  of  James  the  Just,  ''the  brother  of  the  Lord,"

^  Comp.  the  quotations  from  Maimonides  in  the  article  **  Nazarite,"  in  Kitto's
Cycl.  *  Acts  xviii.  i8.

3  This  part  of  the  service  was  the  same  as  at  the  consecration  of  the  pnests
(Lev.  viii.  26).  *  Numb,  vi.  21.


On  Vows.  331

who  presided  over  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  when  Paul  joined
in  the  Nazarite-offering.^  In  this  respect  it  is  noteworthy,
that,  among  those  who  urged  upon  Paul  to  "  be  at  charges  "
with  the  four  Christian  Nazarites,  James  himself  is  not
specially  mentioned.^

2.  Properly  speaking,  the  offering  of  the  first-fruits  belonged
to  the  class  of  religious  and  charitable  contributions,  and
falls  within  our  present  scope  only  in  so  far  as  certain  of  them
had  to  be  presented  in  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem.  Two  of
these  first-fruit  offerings  were  public  and  natioital ;  viz.,  the
first  omer^  on  the  second  day  of  the  Passover,  and  the  wave-
loaves  at  Pentecost  The  other  two  kinds  of  ^^  first-fruits  " —
or  Reshith,  "  the  first,  the  beginning  " — were  offered  on  the
part  of  each  family  and  of  every  individual  who  had  possession
in  Israel,  according  to  the  Divine  directions  in  Ex.  xxii.  29  ;
xxiii.  19;  xxxiv.  26;  Numb.  xv.  20,  21;  xviii.  12,  13;
Deut.  xviii.  4;  and  Deut.  xxvi.  2 — ii,  where  the  ceremonial
to  be  observed  in  the  Sanctuary  is  also  described.  Autho-
rities distinguish  between  the  Biccurijn  {pri^nitiva),  or  first-
fruits  offered  in  their  natural  state,  and  the  Terumoth
{pri7nitice)y  brought  not  as  raw  products,  but  in  a  prepared
state, — as  flour,  oil,  wine,  etc.^  The  distinction  is  convenient,
but  not  strictly  correct,  since  the  Terumoth  also  included
vegetables  and  garden  produce.  (Ter,  ii.  5  ;  iii.  I  ;  x.  5).
Still  less  accurate  is  the  statement  of  modern  writers  that
the  Greek  term  Protogennemata  corresponds  to  Biccurim,
and  Aparchai  to  Terumoth^  an  assertion  not  even  supported

1  Eusebius,  Eccl  Hist.  ii.  23,  3.  *  Acts.  xxi.  20-25.

3  In  our  Authorised  Version  **Terumah"  is  generally  rendered  by  **  heave-
offering,"  as  in  Ex.  xxix.  27  ;  Lev.  vii.  14,  32,  34;  Numb.  xv.  19;  xviii.  8,  ii;
xxxi.  41  ;  and  sometimes  simply  by  "offering,"  as  in  Ex.  xxv.  2 ;  xxx.  13  ;  xxxv,
5 ;  xxxvi.  3,  6 ;  Lev.  xxii.  12 ;  Numb.  v.  9.


332       The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

by  the  use  of  those  words  in  the  version  of  the  Septuag^int,
which  is  so  deeply  tinged  with  traditionalism.

Adopting,  however,  the  distinction  of  the  terms,  for  con-
venience sake,  we  find  that  the  Bicciirim  {primitiva),  were  only
to  be  brought  while  there  was  a  national  Sanctuary.^  Simi-
larly, they  must  be  the  produce  of  the  Holy  Land  itself,  in
which,  according  to  tradition,  were  included  the  ancient
territories  of  Og  and  Sihon,  as  well  as  that  part  of  Syria  which
David  had  subjugated.  On  the  other  hand,  both  the  tithes*
and  the  Terumoth  were  also  obligatory  on  Jews  in  Egypt,
Babylon,  Ammon,  and  Moab.  The  Biccurim  were  only  pre-
sented in  the  Temple,  and  belonged  to  the  priesthood  there
officiating  at  the  time,  while  the  Terumoth  might  be  given  to
any  priest  in  any  part  of  the  land.  The  Mishnah  holds  that,
as  according  to  Deut.  viii.  8  only  the  following  seven  were  to
be  regarded  as  the  produce  of  the  Holy  Land,  from  them
alone  Biccurim  were  due  :  viz.,  wheat,  barley,  grapes,  figs,
pomegranates,  olives,  and  dates.^  If  the  distance  of  the
offerer  from  Jerusalem  was  too  great,  the  figs  and  grapes
might  be  brought  in  a  dried  state.

The  amount  of  the  Biccurim  was  not  fixed  in  the  Divine
law,  any  more  than  of  the  wheat  which  was  to  be  left  in  the
corners  of  the  fields  in  order  to  be  gleaned  by  the  poor.*     But

^  Ex.  xxiii.  19 ;  Deut.  xxvi.  2 ;  Neh.  x.  35.

2  The  Mishnah  {Bice,  i.  lo)  expressly  mentions  **  the  olive-trees  beyond  Jordan,"
although  R.  Joses  declared  that  Biccurim  were  not  brought  from  East  of  Jordan,
since  it  was  not  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  (Deut.  xxvi.  15)  !

3  The  expression  "  honey  *'  in  Deut  viii.  8  must  refer  to  the  produce  of  the
date-palm.

*  The  Mishnah  enumerates  five  things  of  which  the  amount  is  not  fixed  in  the
law  {Peah  i.  1) :  the  comers  of  the  field  for  the  poor ;  the  Biccurim  ;  the  sacrifices  on
coming  up  to  the  feasts  ;  pious  works,  on  which,  however,  not  more  than  one-nfth
of  one's  property  was  to  be  spent ;  and  the  study  of  the  law  (Josh.  i.  8).  Similarly,
**  these  are  the  things  of  which  a  man  eats  the  fruit  in  this  world,  but  their  parses-


On  Vows.  333

according- to  the  Rabbis  in  both  these  cases  one-sixtieth  was
to  be  considered  as  the  minhmim.  From  Ex.  xxiii.  i6  and
Lev.  xxiii.  1 6,  17,  it  was  argued  that  the  Bicairimwtvt  not  to
be  brought  to  Jerusalem  before  Pentecost  ;  nor  yet  were  they
to  be  offered  later  than  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication  of  the
Temple.  If  given  at  any  other  time  than  between  Pentecost
and  the  25th  Kislev,  the  regular  service  was  not  gone  through
at  their  presentation.  Before  describing  this,  we  add  a  few  par-
ticulars about  the  Terumoth,  In  regard  to  them  it  was  said
that  "  a  fine  eye  "  (a  liberal  man)  *'  gives  one-fortieth,"  ''  an  evil
eye"  (a  covetous  person)  *^ one-sixtieth,"  while  the  average  rate
of  contribution — '''  a  middling  eye  " — ^was  to  give  one-fiftieth,
or  two  per  cent.  The  same  proportion  we  may  probably  also
set  down  as  that  of  the  Bicctirim.  Indeed,  the  Rabbis  have
derived  from  this  the  word  Te^'umah^  as  it  were  Terei  Mimeahy
"  two  out  of  a  hundred."  In  the  class  Terumoth  we  may  also
include  the  Reshith  or  *'  first  of  the  fleece;"^  which,  according
to  the  Mishnah^  had  to  be  given  by  every  one  who  possessed
at  least  five  sheep,  and  amounted,  without  dust  or  dirt,  as  a
minimum,  to  five  Judaean,  or  ten  Galilean,  shekel  weight  of  pure
wool  (one  Judsean,  or  sacred  shekel  =  to  under  two  hundred
and  seventy-four  Parisian  grains)  ;  and,  further,  the  Reshith
Challah,  or  "  first  of  the  dough,"  ^  which,  if  the  dough  was  used
for  private  consumption,  was  fixed  by  the  Rabbis  at  one-
twenty-fourth,  if  for  sale  at  one-forty-eighth,  while,  if  it  were
made  for  non-Israelites,  it  was  not  taxed  at  all.  The  Rabbis
have  it,  that  the  "first  of  the  dough"  was  only  due  from

sion  passes  into  the  next  world  (literally,  *  the  capital  continueth  for  the  next, '  as
in  this  world  we  only  enjoy  the  interest) :  to  honour  father  and  mother,  pious
works,  peacemaking  between  a  man  and  his  neighbour,  and  the  study  of  the  law,
which  is  equivalent  to  them  all."     In  Shab.  127,  a,  six  such  things  are  menti.uiit.vi,

^  Deut.  xviii.  11.  2  Choi.  xi.  i,  2.

'  Numb.  XV.  18-21.  The  Mishnah  lays  down  varying  nUes  as  to  the  amount  of
die  Challah  in  different  places  outside  Palestine  {ChaL  iv.  8).


334       T^^^  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services.

wheat,  barley,  casmin,  oats,  and  rye,  but  not  if  the  dough  has
been  made  of  other  esculents,  such  as  rice,  etc.  Of  course,
neither  tithes,  nor  Biccurim,  nor  Terumoth^  were  to  be  given  of
what  already  belonged  to  the  Lord,  nor  of  what  was  not  fairly
the  property  of  a  person.  Thus  if  only  the  trees,  but  not  the
land  in  which  they  grew,  belonged  to  a  man,  he  would  not
give  first-fruits.  If  proselytes,  stewards,  women,  or  slaves
brought  first-fruits,  the  regular  service  was  not  gone  through,
since  such  could  not  have  truthfully  said  either  one  or  other  of
these  verses  :  ^  *'  I  am  come  to  the  country  which  the  Lord
sware  to  our  fathers  to  give  us  ; ''  or,  "  I  have  brought  the
first-fruits  of  the  land  which  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast  given  me."
According  to  Lev.  xix.  23-25,  for  three  years  the  fruits  of  a
newly-planted  tree  were  to  remain  unused,  while  in  the  fourth
year  they  were,  according  to  the  Rabbis,  to  be  eaten  in  Jeru-
salem. Biccurim,  Terumoth,  and  what  was  to  be  left  in  the
**  corners  "  of  the  fields  for  the  poor  were  always  set  apart,
before  the  tithing  was  made.  If  the  offering  of  "  first-fruits  "
had  been  neglected,  one-fifth  was  to  be  added  when  they  were
brought.  Thus  the  prescribed  religious  contributions  of  every
Jewish  layman  at  the  time  of  the  second  Temple  were  as
follows :  Biccurim  and  Tenimothy  say  two  per  cent. ;  from
the  *'  first  of  the  fleece,"  at  least  five  shekels'  weight ;  from  the
*'  first  of  the  dough,"  say  four  per  cent.  ;  "  corners  of  the
fields  "  for  the  poor,  say.  two  per  cent.  ;  the  first,  or  Levitical
tithe,  ten  per  cent.  ;  the  second,  or  festival  tithe,  to  be  used  at
the  feasts  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  third  and  sixth  years  to  be
tiiC  ''  poor's  tithe,"  ten  per  cent.  ;  the  firstlings  of  all  animals,
either  in  kind  or  money-value  ;  five  shekels  for  every  first-born
son,  provided  he  were  the  first  child  of  his  mother,  and  free  of

^  Deut.  xxvi.  3,  10.


On   Vows.  335

blemish  ;  and  the  half-shekel  of  the  Temple-tribute.  Together,
these  amounted  to  certainly  more  than  the  fourth  of  the
return  which  an  agricultural  population  would  have.  And  it
is  remarkable,  that  the  law  seems  to  regard  Israel  as  intended
to  be  only  an  agricultural  people — no  contribution  being  pro-
vided for  from  trade  or  merchandise.  Besides  these  prescribed,
there  were,  of  course,  all  manner  of  voluntary  offerings,  pious
works,  and,  above  all,  the  various  sacrifices  which  each,  accord-^
ing  to  his  circumstances  or  piety,  would  bring  in  the  Temple
at  Jerusalem.

Having  thus  explained  the  nature  of  the  various  religiout
contributions,  it  only  remains  to  describe  the  mode  in  which
the  Biccuriniy  or  "  first-fruits,"  were  ordinarily  set  apart,  and
the  ceremonial  with  which  they  were  brought  to  Jerusalem,
and  offered  in  the  Temple.^  Strictly  speaking,  the  presenta-
tion of  the  first-fruits  was  an  act  of  family  religion.  As  in  the
first  omer  at  the  Passover,  and  by  the  Pentecostal  loaves^  Israel
as  a  nation  owned  their  God  and  King,  so  each  family,  and
every  individual  separately  acknowledged,  by  the  yearly  presen-
tation of  the  first-fruits,  a  living  relationship  between  them  and
God,  in  virtue  of  which  they  gratefully  received  at  His  hands
all  they  had  or  enjoyed,  and  solemnly  dedicated  both  it  and
themselves  to  the  Lord.  They  owned  Him  as  the  Giver  and
real  Lord  of  all,  and  themselves  as  the  recipients  of  His  bounty,
the  dependents  on  His  blessing,  and  the  stewards  of  His  pro-
perty. Their  daily  bread  they  would  seek  and  receive  only  at
His  hand,  use  it  with  thanksgiving,  and  employ  it  in  His  ser-
vice ;  and  this,  their  dependence  upon  God,  was  their  joyous

*  See  the  Mishnak,  'Tract.  Biccurim  and  the  Gema'/ds^  »lsc  MniiDonides.  The
rites  have  also  been  described  by  Jost  (voL  i.  pp.  1 72,  T73\  S'^als^hiitz  {Moi^
Recht),  and  in  other  similar  works.


^^6        The  Te7nplt,  its  Ministry  and  Services*

freedom,  in  which  Israel  declared  itself  the  redeemed  people  of
the  Lord.

As  a  family  feast  thepresentationof  the  first-fruitswould  enter
more  than  any  other  rite  into  family  religion  and  family  life.
Not  a  child  in  Israel — at  least  of  those  who  inhabited  the  Holy
Land — could  have  been  ignorant  of  all  connected  with  this
service,  and  that  even  though  it  had  never  been  taken  to  the
beautiful  "  city  of  the  Great  King,"  nor  gazed  with  marvel
and  awe  at  the  Temple  of  Jehovah.  For  scarcely  had  a  brief
Eastern  spring  merged  into  early  summer,  when  with  the  first
appearance  of  ripening  fruit,  whether  on  the  ground  or  on  trees,
each  household  would  prepare  for  this  service.  The  head  of
the  family — if  we  may  follow  the  sketch  in  the  harvest-picture
of  the  household  of  the  Shunamite — accompanied  by  his  child,
would  go  into  his  field  and  mark  off  certain  portions  from
among  the  most  promising  of  the  crop.  For  only  the  best
might  be  presented  to  the  Lord,  and  it  was  set  apart  before  it
was  yet  ripe,  the  solemn  dedication  being,  however,  afterwards
renewed,  when  it  was  actually  cut.  Thus,  each  time  any  one
would  go  into  the  field,  he  would  be  reminded  of  the  owner-
ship of  Jehovah,  till  the  reapers  cut  down  the  golden  harvest.
So,  also,  the  head  of  the  house  would  go  into  his  vineyards,
his  groves  of  broad-leaved  fig-trees,  of  splendid  pomegranates,
rich  olives  and  stately  palms,  and,  stopping  short  at  each  best
tree,  carefully  select  what  seemed  the  most  promising  fruit,  tie
a  rush  round  the  stem,  and  say :  '*  Lo,  these  are  the  first-
fruits."  Thus  he  renewed  his  covenant-relationship  to  God
each  year  as  "  the  winter  was  past,  the  rain  over  and  gone,  the
flowers  appeared  on  the  earth,  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds
was  come,  and  the  voice  of  the  turtle  was  heard  in  the  land,
the  fig-tree  put  forth  his  green  figs,  and  the  vines  with  the


On  Vows.  337

tender  grapes  gave  a  good  smell/*  And  as  these  fruits  gradu-
ally ripened,  the  ceremonies  connected  first  with  setting  them
apart,  and  then  with  actually  offering  them,  must  have  con-
tinued in  every  Israelitish  household  during  the  greater  por-
tion of  the  year,  from  early  spring  till  winter,  when  the  latest
presentation  might  be  made  in  the  Temple  on  the  25  th  Kislev
(corresponding  to  our  December).

Of  course  every  family  could  not  always  have  sent  its  repre-
sentatives to  Jerusalem.  But  this  difficulty  was  provided  for.
It  will  be  remembered  that  as  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  so
all  Israel  were  divided  into  twenty-four  courses,  who  were
represented  in  the  Sanctuary  by  the  so-called  *'  standing  men,"
or  "  men  of  the  station."  This  implied  a  corresponding  divi-
sion of  the  land  into  twenty-four  districts  or  circuits.  In  the
capital  of  each  district  assembled  those  who  were  to  go  up
with  the  first-fruits  to  the  Temple.  Though  all  Israel  were
brethren,  and  especially  at  such  times  would  have  been  wel-
comed with  the  warmest  hospitality  each  home  could  offer,
yet  none  might  at  that  season  avail  himself  of  it.  For
they  must  camp  at  night  in  the  open  air,  and  not  spend  it  in
any  house,  lest  some  accidental  defilement  from  the  dead,  or
otherwise,  might  render  them  unfit  for  service,  or  their  obla-
tion unclean.  The  journey  was  always  to  be  made  slowly,  for
the  pilgrimage  was  to  be  a  joy  and  a  privilege,  not  a  toil  or
weariness.  In  the  morning,  as  the  golden  sunlight  tipped  the
mountains  of  Moab,  the  stationary  man  of  the  district,  who
was  the  leader,  summoned  the  ranks  of  the  procession  in  the
words  of  Jeremiah  xxxi.  6  :  "  Arise  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Zion,
and  unto  Jehovah  our  God."  To  which  the  people  replied,
as  they  formed  and  moved  onwards,  in  the  appropriate  language
of  Psa.   cxxii.  :  "I  was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me,  Let


33^        The  Temple^  its  Ministry  and  Services.

us  go  into  the  house  of  Jehovah. '^  First  went  one  who  played
the  pipe  ;  then  followed  a  sacrificial  bullock,  destined  for  a
peace-offering,  his  horns  gilt  and  garlanded  with  olive-branches ;
next  came  the  multitude,  some  carrying  the  baskets  with  the
first-fruits,  others  singing  the  Psalms,  which  many  writers  sup-
pose to  have  been  specially  destined  for  that  service,  and  hence  to
have  been  called  "  the  Songs  of  Ascent ;"  in  our  Authorised  Ver-
sion *^  the  Psalms  of  Degrees."  The  poorer  brought  their  gifts
in  wicker  baskets,  which  afterwards  belonged  to  the  officiating
priests  ;  the  richer  theirs  in  baskets  of  silver  or  of  gold,  which
were  given  to  the  Temple  treasury.  In  each  basket  was
arranged,  with  vine-leaves  between  them,  first  the  barley,  then
the  wheat,  then  the  olives ;  next  the  dates,  then  the  pomegra-
nates, then  the  figs  ;  while  above  them  all  clustered,  in  luscious
beauty,  the  rich  swelling  grapes.

And  so  they  passed  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the
land,  everywhere  wakening  the  echoes  of  praise.  As  they
entered  the  city,  they  sang  Psa.  cxxii.  2  :  "  Our  feet  stand
within  thy  gates,  O  Jerusalem."  A  messenger  had  preceded
them  to  announce  their  approach,  and  a  deputation  from  the
Temple,  consisting  of  priests,  Levites,  and  treasurers,  varying
in  numbers  according  to  the  importance  of  the  place  from
which  the  procession  came,  had  gone  out  to  receive  them.  In
the  streets  of  Jerusalem  each  one  came  out  to  welcome  them,
with  shouts  of,  "  Brethren  of  such  a  place  "  (naming  it),  "  ye
come  to  peace  ;  welcome !  Ye  come  in  peace,  ye  bring  peace,
and  peace  be  upon  you  ! "

As  they  reached  the  Temple  Mount,  each  one,  whatever  his
rank  or  condition,  took  one  of  the  baskets  on  his  shoulder,
and  they  ascended,  singing  that  appropriate  hymn,*  "  Praise

*  Psa.  cL


On  Vows.  339

ye  Jehovah  !  praise  God  in  His  sanctuary :  praise  Him  in  the
firmament  of  His  power,"  etc.  As  they  entered  the  courts  of
the  Temple  itself,  the  Levites  intoned  Psa.  xxx. :  "  I  will
extol  Thee,  O  Jehovah  ;  for  Thou  hast  lifted  me  up,  and  hast
not  made  my  foes  to  rejoice  over  me,"  etc.  Then  the  ypung
pigeons  and  turtle-doves  which  hung  from  the  baskets  were
presented  for  burnt-offerings.  After  that,  each  one,  as  he  pre-
sented his  gifts,  repeated  this  solemn  confession  '}  **  I  profess
this  day  unto  Jehovah  thy  God,  that  I  am  come  unto  the
country  that  Jehovah  sware  unto  our  fathers  for  to  give  us."
At  these  words,  he  took  the  basket  from  his  shoulder,  and  the
priest  put  his  hands  under  it  and  waved  it,  the  offerer  continu-
ing :  **  A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was  my  father,  and  he  went
down  into  Egypt,  and  sojourned  there  with  a  few,  and  became
there  a  nation — great,  mighty,  and  populous."  Then  reciting
in  the  words  of  inspiration  the  narrative  of  the  Lord's  marvel-
lous dealings,  he  closed  with  the  dedicatory  language  of  verse
lO :  *'  And  now,  behold,  I  have  brought  the  first-fruits  of  the
land  which  Thou,  O  Jehovah,  hast  given  me."  So  saying,  he
placed  the  basket  at  the  side  of  the  altar,  cast  himself  on  his
face  to  worship,  and  departed.  The  contents  of  the  baskets
belonged  to  the  officiating  priests,  and  the  offerers  themselves
were  to  spend  the  night  at  Jerusalem.

Turning  from  this  to  what  may  be  called  its  higher  applica-
tion, under  the  Christian  dispensation,  we  find  that  the  word
rendered  "  first-fruits  "  occurs  just  seven  times  in  the  New  Tes-
tament. These  seven  passages  are:  Rom.  viii.  13  ;  Rom.  xi.
16;  Rom.  xvi.  5  ;  i  Cor.  xv.  20-23  ;  i  Cor.  xvi.  15  ;  James
i.  18  ;  Rev.  xiv.  4.  If  we  group  these  texts  appropriately,
one  sentence  of  explanation  may  suffice  in  each  case.     First,

^  Dent.  xxvi.  3.


34^       The  Tempi Cy  its  Ministry  and  Services.

we  have,^  as  the  commencement  of  the  new  harvest,  the  Lord
Jesus  Himself,  risen  from  the  dead,  the  "  first-fruits  ** — the  first
sheaf  waved  before  the  Lord  on  the  second  Paschal  day,  just
as  Christ  actually  burst  the  bonds  of  death  at  that  very  time.
Then,  in  fulfilment  of  the  Pentecostal  type  of  the  first  loaves,
we  read  of  the  primal  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  dispensed
on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The  presentation  of  the  first-fruits
IS  explained  by  its  application  to  such  instances  as  Rom.  xvi.
5,  and  I  Cor.  xvi.  15  (in  the  former  of  which  passages  the
reading  should  be  Asia,  and  not  Achaia),  while  the  character
of  these  first-fruits  is  shown  in  James  i.  18.  The  allusion  in
Rom.  xi.  16  is  undoubtedly  to  the  "first  of  the  dough,"  and  so
explains  an  otherwise  difificult  passage.  The  Apostle  argues,
that  if  God  chose  and  set  apart  the  fathers — if  He  took  the
first  of  the  dough,  then  the  whole  lumip  (the  whole  people)  is
in  reality  sanctified  to  Him ;  and  therefore  God  cannot,  and
"hath  not  cast  away  His  people  which  He  foreknew."  Finally,
in  Rev.  xiv.  4,  the  scene  is  transferred  to  Heavan,  where  we
see  the  full  application  of  this  symbol  to  the  Church  of  the
first-born.  But  to  us  all,  in  our  labour,  in  our  faith,  and  in  our
hope,  there  remain  these  words,^  pointing  beyond  time  and
the  present  dispensation  :

*'  Ourselves  also,  which  have  the  first-fruits
OF  THE  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves  groan  within
ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the
redemption  of  our  body."*

•*  Glory  to  God  on  account  of  all  things. " — St.  Chrysostom,
*  1  Cor  XV,  20,  23.  «  Rom.  viii.  2^


APPENDIX.

DID  THE    LORD    INSTITUTE    HIS    "  SUPPER  •»   ON   THE
PASCHAL  NIGHT?

The  question,  whether  or  not  the  Saviour  instituted.  His  Supper
during  the  meal  of  the  Paschal  night,  although  not  strictly  belong-
ing to  the  subject  treated  in  this  volume,  is  too  important,  and  too
nearly  connected  with  it,  to  be  cursorily  passed  over.  The  balance
of  learned  opinion,  especially  in  England,  has  of  late  inclined
agamst  this  view.  The  point  has  been  so  often  and  so  learnedly
discussed,  that  I  do  not  presume  proposing  to  myself  more  than
the  task  of  explaining  my  reasons  for  the  belief  that  the  Lord
instituted  His  "  Supper "  on  the  very  night  of  the  Paschal  Feast,
and  that  consequently  His  crucifixion  took  place  on  the  first  day
of  Unleavened  Bread,  the  isth  of  Nisan.

From  the  writers  on  the  other  side,  it  may  here  be  convenient  to
select  Dr.  Farrar,  as  alike  the  latest  and  one  of  the  ablest  expositors
of  the  contrary  position.  His  arguments  are  stated  in  a  special
Excursus,^  appended  to  his  Life  of  Christ,'^  At  the  outset  it  is
admitted  on  both  sides,  "  that  our  Lord  was  crucified  on  Friday  and
rose  on  Sunday ; "  and,  further,  that  our  Lord  could  not  have  held  a
sort  of  anticipatory  Paschal  Supper  in  advance  of  all  the  other  Jews,
a  Paschal  Supper  being  only  possible  on  the  evening  of  the  14th
Nisan,  with  which,  according  to  Jewish  reckoning,  the  15th  Nisan
began.  Hence  it  follows,  that  the  Last  Supper  which  Christ  cele-
brated with  His  disciples  must  have  either  been  the  Paschal  Feast,
or  an  ordinary  supper,  at  which  He  afterwards  instituted  His  own

*  Excursm  x.  *  Vol.  ii.  pp.  474-483.


342  Appendix.

special  ordinance.*  Now,  the  conclusions  at  which  Dr.  Farrar  arrives
are  thus  summed  up  by  him  :  ^  "  That  Jesus  ate  His  last  supper  mth
the  disciples  on  the  evening  of  Thursday,  Nisan  13,  i.e,^  at  the  time
when,  according  to  Jewish  reckoning,  the  14th  of  Nisan  began;  that
this  supper  was  not,  and  was  not  intended  to  be,  the  actual  Paschal
meal,  which  neither  was  nor  could  be  legally  eaten  till  the  following
evening;  but  by  a  perfectly  natural  identification,  and  one  which
would  have  been  regarded  as  unimportant,  the  Last  Supper,  which
was  a  quasi'Passover^  a  new  and  Christian  Passover^  and  one  in
which,  as  in  its  antitype,  memories  of  joy  and  sorrow  were  strangely
blended,  got  to  be  identified,  even  in  the  memory  of  the  Synoptists,
with  the  Jewish  Passover,  and  that  St.  John  silently  but  deliberately
corrected  this  erroneous  impression,  which,  even  in  his  time,  had
come  to  be  generally  prevalent."

Before  entering  into  the  discussion,  I  must  confess  myself  unable
to  agree  with  the  a  priori  reasoning  by  which  Dr.  Farrar  accounts
for  the  supposed  mistake  of  the  Synoptists.  Passing  over  the  ex-
pression, that  "  the  Last  Supper  was  a  quasi-Passover,''  which  does
not  convey  to  me  a  sufficiently  definite  meaning,  I  should  rather
have  expected  that,  in  order  to  realise  the  obvious  "  antitype,"  the
tendency  of  the  Synoptists  would  have  been  to  place  the  death  of
Christ  on  the  evening  of  the  T4th  Nisan,  when  the  Paschal  lamb  was
actually  slain^  rather  than  on  the  15th  Nisan,  twenty-four  hours  after
that  sacrifice  had  taken  place.  In  other  words,  the  typical  predi-
lections of  the  Synoptists  would,  I  imagine,  have  led  them  to  identify
the  death  of  Christ  with  the  slaying  of  the  lamb ;  and  it  seems,
a  priori^  difficult  to  believe  that,  if  Christ  really  died  at  that  time,
and  His  last  supper  was  on  the  previous  evening — that  of  the  13th
Nisan, — they  should  have  fallen  into  the  mistake  of  identifying  that
supper,  not  with  His  death,  but  with  the  Paschal  meal.  I  repeat :
a  priori^  if  error  there  was,  I  should  have  rather  expected  it  in  the

'  Dr.  Farrar  rightly  shrinks  firom  the  conclusions  of  Caspari  ( Ckron.  Geogr.  EinL
in  d,  Leben  jfesu,  p.  164,  etc.),  who  regards  it  as  what  he  calls  "a  Mazzoth-xnQ^\ "
without  a  Paschal  lamb.     The  suggestion  is  wholly  destitute  of  foundation.

2  Lift  of  Christ,  ii.  p.  482.


Appendix.  343

opposite  direction.  Indeed,  the  main  dogmatic  strength  of  the
argument  on  the  other  side  lies  in  the  consideration  that  the  anti-
type (Christ)  should  have  died  at  the  same  time  as  the  type  (the
Paschal  lamb).  Dr.  Farrar  himself  feels  the  force  of  this,  and  one  of
his  strongest  arguments  against  the  view  that  the  Last  Supper  took
place  at  the  Paschal  meal  is  :  "  The  sense  of  inherent  and  symbolical
fitness  in  the  dispensation  which  ordained  that  Christ  should  be  slain
on  the  day  and  at  the  hour  appointed  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  Paschal
lamb."  Of  all  persons,  would  not  the  Synoptists  have  been  alive  to
this  consideration  ?  And,  if  so,  is  it  likely  that  they  would  have
fallen  into  the  mistake  with  which  they  are  charged?  Would  not
all  their  tendencies  have  lain  in  the  opposite  direction  ?

But  to  pass  to  the  argument  itself  For  the  sake  of  clearness  it
will  here  be  convenient  to  treat  the  question  under  three  aspects : — •
How  does  the  supposition  that  the  Last  Supper  did  not  take  place
on  the  Paschal  night  agree  with  the  general  bearing  of  the  whole
history  ?  What,  fairly  speaking,  is  the  inference  from  the  Synoptical
Gospels?  Lastly,  does  the  account  of  St.  John,  in  this  matter,
contradict  those  of  the  Synoptists,  or  is  it  harmonious  indeed  with
theirs,  but  incomplete  ?

Hoi^  does  the  supposition  that  the  Last  Supper  did  not  take  place
on  the  Paschal  night  agree  with  the  general  bearing  of  the  whole
history  1

1.  The  language  of  the  first  three  evangelists,  taken  in  its  natural
sense,  seems  clearly  irreconcilable  with  this  view.  Even  Dr.  Farrar
admits :  "  If  we  construe  the  language  of  the  evangelists  in  its  plain,
straightforward,  simple  sense,  and  without  reference  to  any  pre-
conceived theories,  or  supposed  necessities  for  harmonising  the
different  narratives,  we  should  be  led  to  conclude  from  the  Synop-
tists that  the  Last  Supper  was  the  ordinary  Paschal  meal."  On  this
point  further  remarks  will  be  made  in  the  sequel.

2.  The  account  of  the  meal  as  given,  not  only  by  the  Synoptists
but  also  by  St.  John,  so  far  as  he  describes  it,  seems  to  me  utterly
inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  an  ordinary  supper.  It  is  not  merely
one  trait  or  another  which  here  influences  us,  but  the  general  im-


344  Appendix.

pression  produced  by  the  whole.  The  preparations  for  the  meal ;
the  allusions  to  it ;  in  short,  so  to  speak,  the  whole  mise  en  scene  is
7iot  that  of  a  common  supper.  Only  the  necessities  of  a  precon-
ceived theory  would  lead  one  to  such  a  conclusion.  On  the  other
hand,  all  is  just  what  might  have  been  expected,  if  the  evangelists
had  meant  to  describe  the  Paschal  meal.

3.  Though  I  do  not  regard  such  considerations  as  decisive,  there
are,  to  my  mind,  difficulties  in  the  way  of  adopting  the  view  that
Jesus  died  while  the  Paschal  lamb  was  being  slain,  far  greater  than
those  which  can  attach  to  the  other  theory.  On  the  supposition  of
Dr.  Farrar,  the  crucifixion  took  place  on  the  14th  Nisan,  "between
the  evenings"  of  which  the  Paschal  lamb  was  slain.  Being  a
Friday^  the  ordinary  evening  service  would  have  commenced  at
12.30  p.M.,^  and  the  evening  sacrifice  offered,  say,  at  1.30,  after
which  the  services  connected  with  the  Paschal  lamb  would  imme-
diately begin.  Now  it  seems  to  me  almost  inconceivable,  that  under
such  circumstances,  and  on  so  busy  an  afternoon,^  there  should  have
been,  at  the  time  when  they  must  have  been  most  engaged^  around  the
cross  that  multitude  of  revihng  Jews,  "  likewise  also  the  chief  priests,
mocking  him,  with  the  scribes,'*  which  all  the  four  evangelists  record.^
Even  more  difficult  does  it  seem  to  me  to  believe,  that  after  the
Paschal  lamb  had  been  slain,  and  while  the  preparations  for  the
Paschal  Supper  were  going  on,  as  St.  John  reports^^  an  ''  honour-
able councillor,''  like  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  and  a  Sanhedrist,  Hke
Nicodemus,  should  have  gone  to  beg  of  Pilate  the  body  of  Jesus,  or
been  able  to  busy  themselves  with  His  burial.

I  proceed  now  to  the  second  question  ;  What  ^fairly  speaking^  is
the  inference  from  the  Synoptical  Gospels  ?

I.  To  this,  I  should  say,  there  can  be  only  one  reply: — The
Synoptical  Gospels,  undoubtedly,  place  the  Last  Supper  in  the
Paschal  night.  A  bare  quotation  of  their  statements  will  establish
this  : — "  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the  Passover 'y^^^  "  Now  the

*  See  page  190.  ^  gg^  ^^e  chaj)ter  on  the  **  Paschal  Rites."

*  Matt,  xxvii.  39,  41 ;  Mark  xv.  29,  31;  Luke  xxiii.  35;  John  xix.  20»

*  John  XX.  38,  39.  *  Matt.  xxvi.  2.


Appendix.  345

first  day  of  unleave^ied  bread  the  disciples  came  to  Jesus,  saying  unto
Him,  Where  wilt  Thou  that  we  prepare  for  Thee  to  eat  the
Passover  T'^  "/  will  keep  the  Passover  at  thy  house  f^  "  They  made
ready  the  Passover''^  Similarly,  in  the  Gospel  by  St.  Mark  :*  "  And
the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread^  when  they  killed  the  Passover^  the
disciples  said  unto  Him,  Where  wilt  Thou  that  we  go  a?id  prepare,
that  Thou  may  est  eat  the  Passover  V  "  The  Master  saith,  Where  is
the  guest-chamber,  where  I  shall  eat  the  Passover  with  my  disciples  V^
"  There  make  ready  for  us."  "  And  they  made  ready  the  Passover,
And  in  the  evening  He  cometh  with  the  twelve.  And  as  they  sat
and  did  eat  .  .  .  ."  And  in  the  Gospel  by  St.  Luke '?  "  Then  came
the  day  of  unleavened  bread ^  when  the  Passover  must  be  killed;'^  "  Go
and  prepare  us  the  Passover^  that  we  may  eat  ;^^  "  Where  is  the  guest-
chamber  where  I  shall  eat  the  Passover  with  my  disciples  V^  "  There
make  ready ;'*  ^^ And  they  made  ready  the  Passover.'^  "And  when
the  hour  was  come  He  sat  down;"  "  With  desire  have  I  desired  to
eat  this  Passover  with  you  before  I  suffer."  It  is  not  easy  to
understand  how  even  a  "  preconceived  theory "  could  weaken  the
obvious  import  of  such  expressions,  especially  when  taken  in  connec-
tion with  the  description  of  the  meal  that  follows.

2.  Assuming,  then,  the  testimony  of  the  Synoptical  Gospels  to  be
unequivocally  in  our  favour,  it  appears  to  me  extremely  improbable
that,  in  such  a  matter,  they  should  have  been  mistaken,  or  that  such
an  *^  erroneous  impression  "  could — and  this  even  "  in  the  time  of  St.
John  " — have  "  come  to  be  generally  prevalent."  On  the  contrary,
I  have  shown  that  if  mistake  there  was,  it  would  most  likely  have
been  rather  in  the  opposite  direction.

3.  We  have  now  to  consider  what  Dr.  Farrar  calls  "the  incidental
notices  preserved  in  the  Synoptists,"  which  seem  to  militate  against
their  general  statement.  Selecting  those  which  are  of  greatest  force,
we  have  : —

(a)  The  fact  "  that  the  disciples^  suppose  Judas  to  have  left  the

*  Matt.  xxvi.  17.  *  Matt.  xxvi.  i8.

3  Matt.  xxvi.  19.  *  Mark  xiv.  12-17.

•  Luke  xxii.  7-lS«  *  John  xiii.  22.


34^  Appendix.

room  in  order  to  buy  what  things  they  had  need  of  against  the  feast."
But  the  disciples  only  suppose  this  \  and  in  the  confusion  and  excite-
ment of  the  scene  such  a  mistake  was  not  unintelligible.  Besides,
though  servile  work  was  forbidden  on  the  first  Paschal  day,  the  pre-
paration of  all  needful  provision  for  the  feast  was  allowed,  and  must
have  been  the  more  necessary,  as,  on  our  supposition,  it  was  fol-
lowed by  a  Sabbath.  Indeed,  the  Talmudical  law  distinctly  allowed
the  continuance  of  such  preparation  of  provisions  as  had  been  com-
menced on  the  "preparation  day"  (Arnheim,  Gebetb,  d,  Isr,,  p.  500,
note  69,  a).  In  general,  we  here  refer  to  our  remarks  at  p.  213,  only
adding,  that  even  now  Rabbinical  ingenuity  can  find  many  a  way  of
evading  the  rigour  of  the  Sabbath-law.

{b)  As  for  the  meeting  of  the  Sanhedrim,  and  the  violent  arrest  of
Christ  on  such  a  night  of  peculiar  solemnity,  the  fanatical  hatred  of
the  chief  priests,  and  the  supposed  necessities  of  the  case,  would
sufficiently  account  for  them.  On  any  supposition  we  have  to  admit
the  operation  of  these  causes,  since  the  Sanhedrim  confessedly  vio-
lated, in  the  trial  of  Jesus,  every  principle  and  form  of  their  own
criminal  jurisprudence.

Lastly,  we  have  to  inquire  :  Does  the  account  of  St,  J^ohn  contradict
those  of  the  Synoptists,  or  is  it  harmo7iious^  indeed^  with  them,  but  in-
complete ?

I.  Probably  few  would  commit  themselves  to  the  statement,  that

the  account  of  St.  John  necessarily  contradicts  those  of  the  Synop-

.  tists.     But   the  following  are  the  principal   reasons   urged   by  Dr.

Farrar  for  the  inference  that,  according  to  St.  John,  the  Last  Supper

took  place  the  evening  before  the  Paschal  night : —

{a)  Judas  goes,  as  is  supposed,  to  buy  the  things  that  they  have
need  of  against  the  feast.     This  has  already  been  explained.

{b)  The  Pharisees  "  went  not  into  the  judgment-hall,  lest  they
should  be  defiled,  but  that  they  might  eat  the  Passover."  And  in
answer  to  the  common  explanation  that  "  the  Passover  "  here  means
the  i5th  day,  Chagigah}  he  adds,  in  a  foot-note,  that  "there  was
nothing  specifically  Paschal  "  about  this  Chagigah.  Dr.  Farrar  should
have  paused  before  committing  himself  to  such  a  statement.     One  of

*  Page  186,  etc.,  and  page  217,  etc.,  of  this  voL


Appendix.  347

the  most  learned  Jewish  writers,  Dr.  Saalschiitz,  is  not  of  his  opinion.
He  writes  as  follows  -}  "  The  whole  feast  and  all  its  festive  meals
were  designated  as  the  Passover.  See  Deut.  xvi.  2,  compare  2  Chron.
XXX.  24,  and  xxxv.  8,  9  ;  Sebach,  99,  b^  Rosh  ha  Sh,  5,  a,  where  it
is  expressly  said,  '  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  term  Passover  ? '
(Answer)  *The  peace-offerings  of  the  Passover.'''  Illustrative  Rab-
binical passages  are  also  quoted  by  Lightfoot  ^  and  by  Schottgen.^
As  a  rule  the  Chagigah  was  always  brought  on  the  15th  Nisan,  and
it  required  Levitical  purity.  Lastly,  Dr.  Farrar  himself  admits  that
the  statement  of  St.  John*  must  not  be  too  closely  pressed,  "for
that  some  Jews  must  have  even  gone  into  the  judgment-hall  without
noticing  *  the  defilement  *  is  clear.''

{c)  According  to  St.  John,^  the  following  Sabbath  was  "  a  high  day,"
or  "a  great  day ;"  on  which  Dr.  Farrar  comments  :  " Evidently
because  it  was  at  once  a  Sabbath,  and  the  first  day  of  the  Paschal
Feast."  Why  not  the  second  day  of  the  feast,  when  the  first  omtr
was  presented  in  the  Temple  ?  To  these  may  be  added  the  following
among  the  other  arguments  advanced  by  Dr.  Farrar  : —

(d)  The  various  engagements  recorded  in  the  Gospels  on  the  day  of
Christ's  crucifixion  are  incompatible  with  a  festive  day  of  rest,  such
as  the  15th  Nisan.  The  reference  to  "Simon  the  Cyrenian  coining
out  of  the  country "  seems  to  me  scarcely  to  deserve  special  notice.
But  then  Joseph  of  Arimathasa  bought  on  that  day  the  "fine  linen "^
for  Christ's  burial,  and  the  women  *' prepared  spices  and  ointments."'
Here,  however,  it  should  be  remembered,  that  the  rigour  of  the  festive
was  not  like  that  of  the  Sabbatic  rest,  that  there  were  means  of
really  buying  such  a  cloth  without  doing  it  in  express  terms  (an  eva^

^  Mos.  Recht^  p.  414.  The  argument  and  quotations  from  the  Talmud  are  also
given  in  Relandus,  Antiq.^  p.  426.  For  a  full  treatment  of  the  question  see
Lightfoot,  HorcB  Hebr.  p.  1 121.

2  HorcB  Hebr,  p.  1 12 1,  etc,  ^  Horce  Hebr.  p.  400.  *  John  xviii.  28.

5  John  xix.  31.  ®  Mark  xv.  46.

"^  Luke  xxiii.  56.  It  should  not  be  overlooked  that  these  supposed  incon-
sistencies appear  in  the  accounts  of  the  Synoptists,  who,  according  to  Dr.  Farrar,
wished  to  convey  that  Christ  was  crucified  on  the  15th  Nisan.  If  really  incon-
pistencies,  they  ire  very  gross,  and  could  scarcely  have  escaped  the  writers.


34^  Appendix.

sion  known  to  Rabbinical  law).  Lastly,  the  Jerusalem  Talmud
{Ber,  5,  b)  expressly  declares  it  lawful  on  Sabbaths  and  feast-days  to
bring  a  coffin,  graveclothes,  and  even  mourning  flutes — in  short,  to
attend  to  the  offices  for  the  dead — just  as  on  ordinary  days.  This
passage,  though,  as  far  as  I  know,  never  before  quoted  in  this  con-
troversy, is  of  the  greatest  importance.

{e)  Dr.  Farrar  attaches  importance  to  the  fact  that  Jewish  tradi-
tion fixes  the  death  of  Christ  on  the  14th  Nisan.^  But  these  Jewish
traditions,  to  which  an  appeal  is  made,  are  not  .only  of  a  late  date,
but  wholly  unhistorical  and  valueless.  Indeed,  as  Dr.  Farrar  himself
shows, 2  they  are  full  of  the  grossest  absurdities.  I  cannot  here  do
better  than  simply  quote  the  words  of  the  great  Jewish  historian.  Dr.
Jost  :^  "  Whatever  attempts  may  be  made  to  plead  in  favour  of  these
Talmudic  stories,  and  to  try  and  discover  some  historical  basis  in
them,  the  Rabbis  of  the  third  and  fourth  centuries  are  quite  at  sea
about  the  early  Christians,  and  deal  in  legends  for  which  there  is  no
foundation  of  any  kind."

(/)  Dr.  Farrar's  objection  that  "  after  supper"  Jesus  and  His  disci-
ples went  out,  which  seems  to  him  inconsistent  with  the  inj.unction  of
Ex.  xii.  22,  and  that  in  the  account  of  the  meal  there  is  an  absence
of  that  hurry  which,  according  to  the  law,  should  have  characterised
the  supper,  arises  from  not  distinguishing  the  ordinances  of  the  so-
called  "  Egyptian  "  from  those  of  "  the  permanent  Passover."  On
this  and  kindred  points  the  reader  is  referred  to  Chaps.  XI.,  XII.

{g)  The  only  other  argument  requiring  notice  is  that  in  their  accounts
the  three  Synoptists  "  give  not  the  remotest  hint  which  could  show
that  a  lamb  formed  the  most  remarkable  portion  of  the  feast."  Now,
this  is  an  objection  which  answers  itself.  For,  according  to  Dr.
Farrar,  these  Synoptists  had,  in  writing  their  accounts,  been  under  the
mistaken  impression  that  they  were  describing  the  Paschal  Supper.
As  for  their  silence  on  the  subject,  it  seems  to  me  capable  of  an
interpretation  the  opposite  of  that  which  Dr.  Farrar  has  put  upon  it.

I  I  have  not  been  able  to  verify  Dr.  Farrar *s  references  to  Mishnah,  Sanh.  vi.  2
and  X.  4.  But  I  agree  with  Gratz  {GescTi.  d.  Juden,^  iii.  p.  242,  note),  that  much
in  Sanh.  vii.  bears,  though  unexpressed,  reference  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Sanhe-
drim against  Christ.       *  Excursus^  ii.  p.  452.       ^  Gesch.  d.  JudetUk.^  i.  p.  405.


Appendix.  349

Considering  the  purpose  of  all  which  they  had  in  view — the  fulfilment
of  the  type  of  the  Paschal  Supper,  and  the  substitution  for  it  of  the
Lord's  Supper — their  silence  seems  not  only  natural,  but  what  might
have  been  expected.  For  their  object  was  to  describe  the  Paschal
Supper  only  in  so  far  as  it  bore  upon  the  insuiuuon  of  the  Lord's
Supper.  Lastly,  it  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  throughout  the
whole  Mishnic  account  of  the  Paschal  Supper  there  is  only  one  isolated
reference  to  the  lamb — a  circumstance  so  striking,  that,  for  example,
Caspari  has  argued  from  it^  that  ordinarily  this  meal  was  what  he  calls
"a  meal  of  unleavened  bread,"  and  that  in  the  majority  of  cases
there  was  no  Passover-lamb  at  all !  I  state  the  inference  drawn  by
Dr.  Caspari,  but  there  can  scarcely  be  any  occasion  for  replying
to  it.

On  the  other  hand,  I  have  now  to  add  two  arguments  taken  from
the  masterly  disquisition  of  the  whole  question  by  Wieseler,^  to  show
that  St.  John,  like  the  Synoptists,  places  the  date  of  the  crucifixion
on  the  15th  Nisan,  and  hence  that  of  the  Last  Supper  on  the  even-
ing of  the  14th.

{a)  Not  only  the  Synoptists,  hut  St.  John '  refers  to  the  custom
of  releasing  a  prisoner  at  "  the  feast,"  or,  as  St  John  expressly  calls  it,
**  at  the  Passover."  Hence  the  release  of  Barabbas,  and  with  it  the
crucifixion  of  Jesus,  could  not  have  taken  place  (as  Dr.  Farrar  sup-
poses) on  the  14th  of  Nisan,  the  morning  of  which  could  not  have
been  designated  as  "  the  feast,"  and  still  less  as  **  the  Passover."

(h)  When  St.  John  mentions  *  that  the  accusers  of  Jesus  went  not
into  Pilate's  judgment-hall  "  lest  they  should  be  defiled ;  but  that
they  might  eat  the  Passover,"  he  could  not  have  referred  to  their
eating  the  Paschal  Supper.  For  the  defilement  thus  incurred  would
only  have  lasted  to  the  evening  of  that  day,  whereas  the  Paschal
Supper  was  eaten  after  the  evening  had  commenced,  so  that  the
defilement  of  Pilate s  judgment-hall  in  the  morning  zvould  in  no  way
have  interfered  with  their  eating  the  Paschal  Lamb,     But  it  would  have

^  Chronol.  Geogr.  Einl,  in  d.  Leben  Jesu  ChHsti^  p.  164.

'  Chronolog,  Synopse  der  4  Evang.  p.  333,  etc.

*  John  xviii.  39.  *  *  John  xviii.  28,


S5^  Appendix.

interfered  with  their  either  offering  or  partaking  of  the  Chagigah  on
the  isth  Nisan.^

2.  Hitherto  I  have  chiefly  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  account
of  St.  John  is  harmonious  with  that  of  the  Synoptists  in  reference
to  the  time  of  the  Last  Supper.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  am  free
to  confess  that,  if  it  had  stood  alone,  I  should  not  have  been  able  to
draw  the  same  clear  inference  from  it  as  from  the  narratives  of  the
first  three  gospels.  My  difficulty  here  arises,  not  from  what  St
John  says,  but  from  what  he  does  not  say.  His  words,  indeed,  are
quite  consistent  with  those  of  the  Synoptists,  but,  taken  alone^  they
would  not  have  been  sufficient  to  convey,  at  least  to  my  mind,  the
same  clear  impression.  And  here  I  have  to  observe  that  St.  John's
account  must  in  this  respect  seem  equally  incomplete,  whichever
theory  of  the  time  of  the  Last  Supper  be  adopted.  If  the  Gospel  of
St.  John  stood  alone,  it  would,  I  think,  be  equally  difficult  for  Dr.
Farrar  to  prove  from  it  his,  as  for  me  to  estabUsh  my  view.  He
might  reason  from  certain  expressions,  and  so  might  I ;  but  there
are  no  such  clear,  unmistakeable  statements  as  those  in  which  the
Synoptists  describe  the  Passover  night  as  that  of  the  Last  Supper.
And  yet  we  should  have  expected  most  fulness  and  distinctness
from  St.  John  !

Is  not  the  inference  suggested  that  the  account  in  the  Gospel  of
St.  John,  in  the  form  in  which  we  at  present  possess  it,  may  be  in-
complete ?  I  do  not  here  venture  to  construct  a  hypothesis,  far  less
to  offer  a  matured  explanation,  but  rather  to  make  a  suggestion  of
what  possibly  may  have  been,  and  to  put  it  as  a  question  to  scholars.
But  once  admit  the  idea,  and  there  are,  if  not  many,  yet  weighty
reasons,  to  confirm  it.     For,

1.  It  would  account  for  all  the  difficulties  felt  by  those  who  have
adopted  the  same  view  as  Dr.  Farrar,  and  explain,  not,  indeed,  the
supposed  difference — for  such  I  deny — but  the  incompleteness  of
St.  John's  narrative,  as  compared  with  those  of  the  Synoptists.

2.  It  explains  what  otherwise  seems  almost  unaccountable.  I  agree
with  Dr.  Farrar  that  St.  John's  *' accounts  of  the  Last  Supper  are

*  This  argument  is  already  mentioned  by  Lightfoot,  u*s.


Appendix.  351

incomparably  more  full  than  those  of  the  other  evangelists/'  and  that
he  '*  was  more  immediately  and  completely  identified  with  every  act
in  those  last  trying  scenes  than  any  one  of  the  apostles/'  And  yet,
strange  to  say,  on  this  important  point  St.  John's  information  is  not
only  more  scanty  than  that  of  the  Synoptists,  but  so  indefinite  that,
if  alone,  no  certain  inference  could  be  drawn  from  it.  The  circum-
stance is  all  the  more  inexplicable  if,  as  on  Dr.  Farrar's  theory,  "  the
error  "  of  the  Synoptists  was  at  the  time  "  generally  prevalent,"  and
"  St.  John  silently  but  deliberately  "  had  set  himself  to  correct  it.

3.  Strangest  of  all,  the  Gospel  of  St.  John  is  the  only  one  which
does  not  contain  any  account  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,
and  yet,  if  anywhere,  we  would  have  expected  to  find  it  here.

4.  The  account  in  John  xiii.  begins  with  a  circumstantiality  which
leads  us  to  expect  great  fulness  of  detail.  And  yet,  while  maintain-
ing throughout  that  characteristic,  so  far  as  the  teaching  of  Jesus  in
that  night  is  concerned,  it  almost  suddenly  and  abruptly  breaks  off
(about  ver.  31)  in  the  account  of  what  He  and  they  who  sat  with
Him  did  at  the  Supper.

5.  Of  such  a  possible  hiatus  there  seems,  on  closer  examination,
some  internal  confirmation,  of  which  I  shall  here  only  adduce  this  one
instance — that  chapter  xiv.  concludes  by,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence  f
which,  however,  is  followed  by  other  three  chapters  of  precious
teaching  and  intercessory  prayer,  when  the  narrative  is  abruptly
resumed,  by  a  strange  repetition,  as  compared  with  xiv.  31,  in  these
words  (xviii.  i)  :  "When  Jesus  had  spoken  these  words,  He  went
forth  with  His  disciples  over  the  brook  Cedron."

Further  discussion  would  lead  beyond  the  necessary  limits  of  the
present  Excursus,  Those  who  know  how  bitterly  the  Quartodeciman
controversy  raged  in  the  early  Church,  and  what  strong  things  were
put  forth  by  the  so-called  "disciples  of  John"  in  defence  of  their
view,  that  the  Last  Supper  did  not  take  place  on  the  Paschal  night, "
may  see  grounds  to  account  for  such  a  hiatus.  In  conclusion,  I
would  only  say  that,  to  my  mind,  the  suggestion  above  made  would
in  no  way  be  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  of  the  plenary  inspira*
tion  of  Holy  Scripture.


ANALYSIS    OF    CONTENTS.


Chap.  I.— A  First  View  of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  Temple.

Memories  of  Jerusalem — Origin  of  the  name — Situation  of  the  city — First
impressions  of  its  splendour— Approach  from  the  Mount  of  Olives — The
walls  of  Jerusalem — Tower  of  Antonia — Hills  on  which  the  city  was  built
— The  streets — Principal  buildings — Synagogues — Jewish  tradition  about
the  *'Shushan  Gate"  and  the  arched  roadway  from  the  Temple  to  the
Mount  of  Olives — -Lunar  station  on  the  Mount  of  Olives — Lavatories  and
booths —Approach  to  the  Temple-r-Extent  of  the  Temple-plateau —
General  appearance  of  the  Temple — Rabbinical  legends  about  Jerusalem
and  the  Temple — Ruins  of  ancient  Jerusalem ;  their  depth  below  the
present  level        ....         ......     Page

Chap.  II. — Within  the  Holy  Place.

The  principal  entrances  from  the  west  into  the  Temple — The  **  Royal  Bridge"
over  the  Tyropoeon  Valley — Its  proportions  and  architecture —  **  The
porches"  of  the  Temple — The  *' Royal  Porch" — Its  name  and
dimensions — View  from  the  top  of  the  colonnade — Chicot  among  the
doctors  of  the  law — Solomon's  Porch — The  Court  of  the  Gentiles —
Marble  screen  with  tablets  warning  off  Gentiles — The  Chel  or  terrace  of
the  Temple — Gates  into  the  inner  courts — The  **  Beautiful  Gate" — The
Court  of  the  Women — The  thirteen  Treasury-chests  or  '* trumpets" —
Chambers  and  side  courts — The  Gate  of  Nicanor — The  fifteen  steps  of
*' Ascent,"  or  of  the  Levites — The  Court  of  Israel— The  Court  of  the
Priests— Chambers  connected  with  it— The  *'Beth  Moked  "—The  hall  of
hewn  stones — Description  of  the  Temple  in  the  Mishnah — The  altar  of
burnt- offering — Red  line  around  the  middle  of  it — Arrangements  for
sacrificing — The  laver — The  water  supply  of  the  Temple — Its  drainage
— Proportions  of  the  Holy  House  itself — The  Porch — The  Holy  Place —
The  Most  Holy  Place — Silence  of  the  Rabbis  about  Herod — The  disciples
pointing  out  the  Temple-buildings  to  the  Master — May  any  of  the  Temple
spoils  be  still  existent  ?••••••••     Page


Analysts  of  Contents.  353

Chap.  III. — Temple  Order,  Revenues,  and  Music.

Comparison  of  the  first  and  second  Temple — What  was  wanting  in  the  latter—
**  Without  the  Gate" — Different  degrees  of  sanctity  attaching  to  different
localities — Ordinances  enforcing  due  reverence  in  the  Temple — *'  Provide
neither  gold,"  /'nor  scrip,"  '* neither  shoes,  nor  yet  staves" — Punish-
ment of  high-handed  profanity — **  Death  by  the  hand  of  God"  and
** cutting  off" — ** Anathema  Maranatha " — The  punishment  of  "the
rebels'  beating" — The  "forty  stripes  save  one,"  and  how  administered —
Need  of  strict  discipline  from  the  size  of  the  Temple  and  the  number  of  wor-
shippers— The  revenues  of  the  Temple — Things  dedicated  and  free  gifts —
The  Temple-tribute — How  collected — Discount  allowed  to  be  charged  by
**the  money-changers" — Computed  annual  amount  of  Temple- tribute —
Amount  of  contributions  from  the  Jews  of  "  the  dispersion  " — How
the  Temple  revenues  were  employed — Splendour  of  the  Temple  ser-
vices— The  hymnody  of  the  Temple — References  to  it  in  the  Book  of
Revelation — Singing  in  the  Temple — Threefold  blast  of  the  priests*
trumpets — Instrumental  music  in  the  Temple — Antiphonal  singing —
Remnants  of  Temple  music  .......     Fa^e    38

Chap.  IV. — The  Officiating  Priesthood.

Priests  "  obedient  to  the  faith  " — Those  who  were  prevented  from  going  up

in  their  course  prayed  and  fasted  in  their  synagogues — The  institution  of  ^-^
the  priesthood — The  two  ideas  of  reconciliation  and  holiness — Arrange-
ment of  the  priests  into  twenty- four  courses — How  their  number  was
made  up  after  the  return  from  Babylon — Arrangement  of  the  Levites  into
twenty-four  courses — Duties  of  the  Levites  in  the  Temple — The  Sabbath
law  in  the  Temple — Arrangement  of  the  courses  on  duty — The  law  op-
posed to  all  priestly  pretensions — **  Learned  "  and  '*  unlettered  priests  " —
Value  attached  to  learning — The  high-priests — Their  succession — Age
and  qualifications  for  the  priestly  office — High-priests  **by  anointing"
and  high-priests  "by  investiture" — Dress  of  the  high-priest — Illustra-
tions of  New  Testament  allusions — Were  phylacteries  at  the  time  of  Christ
universally  worn? — The  various  officials  among  the  priesthood — The
** elders  of  the  priests"  or  **  honourable  councillors" — The  twenty-
four  sources  whence  the  support  of  the  priesthood  was  derived      .     Page     eg

Chap.  V. — Sacrifices  :   Their  Order  and  Their  Meaning.

Sacrifices   the  centre    of   the   Old    Testament   dispensation — Symbols    and
Types — Antisacrificial  views  of  Rabbinism — Substitution  the  fundamental

AA


354  Analysis  of  Contents.


idea  of  sacrifice — The  sacrifice  when  God  first  entered  into  covenant-
relationship  with  Israel — After  that  all  sacrifices  either  in  communion,  or
for  communion  with  God — Bloody  and  unbloody  sacrifices — General
requisites  of  all  sacrifices — Animals  used  for  sacrifices — Public  and
private  ;   most  holy    and   less   holy  sacrifices — Acts    belonging   to  the

V  offerer,  and  priestly  acts — Mode  of  offering  sacrifices— Imposition  of
hands  and  confession — Waving — The  sprinkling  of  the  blood — Different
modes    of  it — Other  sacrificial  rites — Meaning  of   the  burning  of    the

^  sacrifice — Views  of  the  ancient  Synagogue  about  sacrifices — Modern
Jewish  sacrifice  on  the  Day  of  Atonement        ....     Pa^e    79

Chap.  VI. — The  Burnt-Offering,  the  Sin-  and  Trespass-Offering,

AND   the   PEACE-OfFERING.

Internal  connection  of  the  Old  Testament — Progress  in  its  prophecies —
Messianic  interpretation  of  the  ancient  Rabbis — The  hurnt'offe7dng :  its
meaning  and  character — How  offered — The  only  sacrifice  lawful  to  non-
Israelites — The  sin-offering — Differences  between  it  and  the  trespass-offer-
ing— Public  and  private,  fixed  and  varying,  outer  and  inner  sin-offerings —
The  sin-offering  differing  according  to  the  theocratic  position  of  the  offerer
— Its  blood  sprinkled — The  sacrificial  meal — The  trespass-offering  iox  a
certain,  and  that  for  a  doubtful  trespass — Its  vsv^2sivs\^—T\iQ  peace-offering :
its  meaning — How  and  where  offered — "Waving  "and  **  Heaving" —
What  offerings  were  **  waved" — -The  various  meat-offerings — How
offered— Need  of  a  large  number  of  officiating  priests  for  all  these
services ' Page    96

Chap.  VII.— At  Night  in  the  Temple.

The  allusions  to  Temple  minutice  in  the  writings  of  St  John — Reference
to  the  burning  of  the  garments  of  those  asleep  on  Temple-guard  at
night — Was  there  an  evening  service  in  the  Temple?— Time  and
duration  of  the  morning  sacrifice — Time  and  duration  of  the  evening
sacrifice — At    night  in  the   Temple — Parting  salutation  of   the   priests

V  on  the  Sabbath — Closing  the  Temple  gates — Custody  of  the  keys —
The  evening  meal — Arrangement  of  accounts  for  meat-offerings  sold
during  the  day — The  Temple-guard  at  night— Division  of  the  night  into
watches — Rounds  made  by  the  **  captain  of  the  guard  " — Unexpected
summons  to  prepare  for  the  service — The  bath — Priestly  inspection  of
the  Temple — Casting  of  the  lot  for  the  services  of  the  morning — *'  The
sky  is  lit  up  as  far  as  Hebron  ".......     Page  112


Analysis  of  Contents.  355


v/


Chap.  VIII. —The  Morning  and  the  Evening  Sacrifice.

Was  public  prayer  offered  in  the  Temple? — Rabbinical  views  on  the  subject
of  prayer — Eulogies — Prayers  of  celebrated  Rabbis — The  Lord's  Prayer
— The  people  respond  in  the  Temple  by  a  benediction,  not  by  an  Amen-r-
Attitude  in  prayer — Two  elements  in  prayer — The  Eulogy  and  the
Tephillah — Prayer  symbolised  by  the  burning  of  incense — Zacharias
offering  this  service  in  the  Holy  Place — Morning  service  oif  the  priests
on  whom  \}s\q  first  lot  had  fallen — The  preparation  of  the  altar  of  burnt-
offering — The  second  lot — The  daily  sacrifice,  and  how  it  was  offered —
The  altar  of  incense  is  cleansed  and  the  candlestick  dressed — The  sacri-
fice is  cut  up — The  third  zxi^  fourth  lots  are  cast — Prayer  of  the  priests —
Service  of  burning  the  incense — **  gilencej'  in  the  Temple — Prayers  of
priests  and  people — Burning  the  sacrifice  on  the  altar — The  priest*s
blessing — The  drink-offering  accompanied  by  Temple  music — The
Evening  Service — Order  of  Psalms  for  each  day  in  the  week         .     Page  124

Chap.  IX.— -Sabbath  in  the  Temple,

Meaning  and  object  of  the  Sabbath — Rabbinical  ordinances  of  Sabbath
observance,  and  their  underlying  principles — Differences  between  the
schools  of  Hillel  and  Shammai — "  The  eve  of  the  Sabbath  " — Commence-
ment of  the  Sabbath,  how  announced— The  renewal  of  the  shewbread  —
When  and  how  it  had  been  prepared — The  table  of  shewbread — How
the  bread  was  arranged  upon  it — Service  of  the  priests  in  removing  the
old  and  putting  on  the  new  shewbread — Meaning  of  the  shewbread —
The  Sabbath  service  in  the  Temple — Sabbatical  years — Rabbinical
ordinances  on  the  subject — Scriptural  ordinances — Were  debts  wholly
remitted,  or  only  deferred  on  Sabbatical  years? — The  ^'' FrosbuV —
Rabbinical  evasions  of  the  Divine  law — Sabbath  observance  by  the
Saviour ....     Page  145

Chap.  X. — Festive  Cycles  and  Arrangement  of  the  Calendar.

The  number  seven  as  determining  the  arrangement  of  the  sacred  year —
The  three  festive  cycles  of  the  year — Difference  between  the  Moed  and
the  Chag — Three  general  characteristics  of  the  great  feasts  —  Post -Mosaic
festivals  and  fasts — Duty  of  appearing  three  times  a  year  in  the  Temple
— The  *' stationary  men"  Israel's  representatives  in  the  Temple —
Their  duties — The  Hebrew  year  lunar — Necessity  of  introducing  leap-years


35^  Analysis  of  Contents.

— How  the  appearance  of  the  New  Moon  was  officially  ascertained
and  announced — "Full"  and  '*  imperfect  "  months — New  Year's  Day —
Origin  of  the  Hebrew  names  of  the  months — The  *'  civil "  and  the
**  sacred  "  year —Jewish  era — Division  of  the  day  and  of  the  night —
Jewish  calendar  ....••.••.     Page  165

Chap.  XL — The  Passover.

Difference  between  the  Passover  and  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread — Three-
fold reference  of  the  Passover  to  nature,  history,  and  grace — Time  of  the
Passover — Meaning  of  the  term  Pesach — Difference  between  the  so-called
**  Egyptian"  and  the  *' Permanent  Passover" — Mention  in  Scripture
of  seasons  of  Paschal  observance — Number  of  worshippers  in  the  Temple
at  the  Passover — Preparations  for  the  feast — The  first  and  the  second
Chagigah — The  **  eve  of  the  Passover" — Search  for,  and  removal  of  all
leaven — What  constituted  leaven — Commencement  of  the  feast  on  the
forenoon  of  the  14th  Nisan — At   what  hour   it   became   duty  to  abstain

/from  leaven,  and  how  it  was  intimated— Selection  of  the  Paschal
Lamb— At  what  hour  it  was  slain — Division  of  the  offerers  into  three
companies — Mode  of  sacrificing  the  Paschal  Lamb — The  singing  of  the
"Hallel" — Why  it  was  called  the  Egyptian  Hallel — How  the  lambs
were  prepared  after  sacrifice— The  disciples  preparing  the  Passover  for
the  Master Page  i*J^

Chap.  XII. — The  Paschal  Feast  and  The  Lord's  Supper.

Jewish  traditions  about  the  Paschal  season  —  Present  observances  of  the
Paschal  Supper — Ancient  usages  continued  in  our  own  days — How  the
Paschal  Lamb  was  roasted — Reason  of  this  ordinance — Christ  linking
His  own  Supper  to  the  Paschal  Feast — The  Paschal  Lamb  specially
typical  of  the  Saviour — How  the  guests  sat  at  the  Supper — The  use  of
wine  absolutely  incumbent- — Rabbinic  story  about  the  cup  of  blessing
— The  service  of  the  Paschal  Supper — The  Passover  Lamb^  the  Un-
leavened Breads  and  the  Bitter  Herbs — The  Apkikomen—T\iQ  first  cup
and  the  blessing  over  it — Washing  of  hands — Two  different  kinds  of
ceremonial  washing — The  bitter  herbs  are  eaten — Questions  by  the
youngest  at  table,  and  instruction  given  him  by  the  head  of  the  house —
The  first  part  of  the  "Hallel"  is  sung — The  second  cup  and  the  breaking
of  unleavened  cakes — The  sop — The  Paschal  Supper  itself — The  third
or  cup  of  blessing — Concluding  portion  of  the  "  Hallel " — Did  our  Lord
eat  the  Passover  Supper  on  the  night  of  Flis  betrayal  ? — Institution  of  the
Lord's  Supper Page  196


Analysis  of  Contents.  357

Chap.  XTIL— The  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  a.nd  the  Day
OF  Pentecost.

Duration  of  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,  and  origin  of  its  name — The
Passover  a  remembrance  of  Israel's  deliverance  from  bondage,  rather
than  of  that  bondage — Observance  of  the  15th  of  Nisan — Offerings  for
that  day — The  Chagigah — The  Lord's  betrayal  into  the  hands  of  the
Gentiles —  His  condemnation  by  the  Sanhedrim — The  death  on  the  Cross
about  the  time  the  evening  incense  was  offered — At  the  time  of  the  descent
from  the  Cross  a  procession  across  Kedron  to  prepare  for  cutting  down  the
Passover  sheaf — By  whom,  where,  and  with  what  formalities  this  was  done

—  How  the  omer  was  prepared  for  presentation  on  the  1 6th  Nisan  in  the
Temple — The  last  day  of  the  Passover — The  intervening  days,  or  Moed
Katon — The  Feast  of  Pentecost — Its  historical  reference—  Various  names
of  the  feast — Its  observance  in  the  Temple — Sacrifices — The  "Hallel"
chanted  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  flute — The  presentation  of  the  two
wave-loaves  with  their  accompanying  sacrifices — How  the  wave-loaves
had  been  prepared — Their  shape  and  weight — Why  these  loaves  were
leavened — The  waving  of  the  two  live  lambs — Conclusion  of  the  services
— Meaning  of  the  Feast  of  Pentecost — The  outpouring  of  the  Holy
Spirit Page  2^5

Chap.  XIV. — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.

The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  a  harvest  feast  pointing  to  the  final  harvesting  of
the  Church — Names  of  the  feast— S'gnificance  of  its  occurrence  on  the  15th
day  of  the  seventh  month,  and  after  the  Day  of  Atonement — The  three
characteristics  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles— This  feast  peculiarly  comme-
morative of  Israel  being  strangers  and  pilgrims  in  the  earth — -The  dwell-
ing in  booths— Rabbinical  ordinances  about  their  structure — The  wor-
shippers carrying  the  jEthrog  and  the  Lulav  in  the  Temple —  Sacrifices  for
the  Week  of  Tabernacles — The  characteristic  number  seven  appears  in
them — Daily  diminution  in  the  number  of  bullocks  offered  —Services  in  the
Temple — Solemn  procession  to  Siloam  to  fetch  water — Decoration  of  the
altar  with  v^dllow  branches — Pouring  of  the  water  carried  from  Siloam —
Opposition  of  the  Sadducees  to  this  practice — Singingof  the  "  Hallel*' — The
waving  of  the  Lulav  while  singing  certain  portions  of  Psa.  cxviii. — Refer-
ence of  this  Hosanna  to  Christ  on  the  day  of  His  entrance  into  Jerusalem

—  Procession  of  the  priests  in  the  Temple  and  circuit  of  the  altar —
Repetition  of  this  seven  times  on  the  last  day  of  the  feast,  the  Day  of
the  Great  Hosanna — Christ  in  the  Temple  crying,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let


35^  Analysts  of  Contefzfs.

him  come  unto  Me  and  drink  " — The  words  of  Christ  :  **  I  am  the  light  of
the  world  " — Their  probable  reference  to  the  Temple  illumination  at  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles — Description  of  the  Temple  illumination — Order  of
Psalms  sung  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles — Reference  to  this  feast  in  the
Book  of  Revelation — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  the  only  unfulfilled  type
of  the  Old  Testament  ...         ......     Pa^e  232

Chap.  XV. — The  New  Moons  :  The  Feast  of  the  Seventh
New  Moon,  or  of  Trumpets,  or  New  Year's  Day.

Observance  of  the  New  Moon— How  its  appearance  was  determined — The
blowing  of  trumpets  and  its  meaning—  Sacrifices  on  New  Moon's  Day —
Rabbinical  superstitions  connected  with  these  days — Number  of  priests
officiating  in  the  Temple — Whether  and  what  special  prayers  were  said—
The  New  Moon  of  the  seventh  month,  the  *'day  of  blowing,"  or  NeW
Year's  Day  — Special  sacrifices  on  that  day — Order  of  Psalms  sung^ —
Rabbinical  notions  as  to  the  judgment  pronounced  on  that  day — Their
interpretation  of  the  blowing  of  trumpets — On  New  Year's  Day  the  horn
blown  —  Rabbinical  traditions  on  the  subject — The  **  benedictions  "  oil
New  Year's  Day — New  Year's  Day  in  the  time  of  Ezra— Possible  allusion
to  it  in  Eph.  v.  8,  14 ,         .        .        .     Page  250

Chap.  XVI. — The  Day  of  Atonement.

How  **the  commandment"  bears  testimony  to  its  inherent  **  weakness  and
unprofitableness  " —  Specially  so  in  the  services  of  the  Day  of  Atonement
— Peculiar  solemnity  of  that  day — Its  name — Significance  of  its  occur-
rence on  the  loth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  and  previous  to  the  Feast  of
Tabernacles — The  high-priest  officiating  in  a  peculiar  white  dress —
Symbolical  meaning  of  this — Threefold  sacrifices  of  that  day — Their  order
— Number  of  priests  employed — The  high-priest  prepares  for  the  Day
of  Atonement  seven  days  before  its  occurrence,  and  takes  up  his  abode
in  the  Temple — The  night  of  the  fast — The  high-priest  himself  performs
all  the  day's  services— How  often  he  changed  his  raiment  and  washed  his
body,  or  else  his  hands  and  feet — The  ordinary  morning  service — The
high-priest  puts  on  his  linen  garments  for  the  first  time — The  sin-offering
for  the  high-priest  and  his  family — Confession  over  it — The  ineffable
name  of  Jehovah  is  ten  times  pronounced  on  that  day — Mode  of  casting
the  lot  over  the  two  goats — The  two  are  really  one  sacrifice — A  tongue-
shaped  piece  of  scarlet  cloth  is  tied  to  the  horn  of  the  goat  for  Azazel
— This  goat  standing  before  the  people,  waiting  till  their  sins  should  be
laid  upon  him — Confession  of  sin  for  the  priesthood,  and  sacrifice  of  the


Analysis  of  Contents.  359

bullock — The  high-priest  enters  the  Most  Holy  Place  for  the  first  time  to
burn  the  incense — Prayer  of  the  high-priest  on  coming  out — The  high-
priest  enters  the  Most  Holy  Place  a  second  time  with  the  blood  of  the
bullock — And  a  third  time  with  that  of  the  goat  for  Jehovah — The  sprink-
ling towards  the  veil,  of  the  altar  of  incense,  and  of  that  of  bunit-offermg
—  The  high-priest  lays  the  personal  sins  and  the  guilt  of  the  people
on  the  so-called  "scape-goat  " — Peculiar  mode  of  confession  over  it — The
goat  is  led  away  into  the  wilderness — And  pushed  over  a  precipice — Mean-
ing of  the  scape-goat — Reference  to  the  coming  of  Christ,  as  He  who
would  take  away  sin — Meaning  of  the  expression  la-Azazel — The  high^
priest's  reading  and  prayers  in  the  Court  of  the  Women — The  high-
priest  puts  on  the  golden  garments  to  offer  the  festive,  burnt-,  and  other
sacrifices — He  again  puts  on  his  linen  garments  to  enter  the  Most  Holy
Place  for  the  fourth  and  last  time — On  the  afternoon  of  the  day,  dance  and
song  of  the  maidens  of  Jerusalem  in  the  vineyards  — Views  of  the  Syna-
gogue about  the  Day  of  Atonement      ...  •         •     Pc^ge  263

Chap.  XVII.— Post-Mosaic  Festivals.

Object  of  tnese  feasts— The  Feast  of  Fufim — Its  origin  and  time — Was  it  ever
attended  by  the  Lord  ? — Services  on  the  Feast  of  Purim — WTien  and  how
the  Megillah  was  read — Modem  ceremonials — The  Feast  of  the  Dedica-
tion of  the  Temple — Its  origin  and  duration — The  "Hallel"sung  on  each
day  of  its  duration  ;  the  people  carried  palm  branches,  and  there  was  a
grand  illumination  of  the  Temple  and  of  private  houses — Suggestion  that
the  date  of  Christmas  was  taken  from  this  feast — Practice  as  to  the
illumination  The  Feast  of  the  Wood-offering  on  the  last  of  the  nine
seasons  of  the  year,  when  such  offerings  were  brought  in  the  Temple —
Rabbinical  accounts  of  its  origin — Maidens  dance  in  the  vineyards  on
the  afternoon  of  that  day — Fasts,  public  and  private — Memorial  fasts^
The  four  great  fasts  mentioned  in  Zech.  viiL  — Mode  of  observing  public
fests Page  289

Chap.  XVIII. — On  Purifications.

Sjinbolical  meaning  of  Levitical  defilements  and  purifications — The  purifi-
cation of  the  Virgin  Mary  in  the  Temple — Defilement  by  contact  with
death — Six  degrees  of  defilement — Sacrifice  of  the  red  heifer— Preser-
vation of  its  ashes,  and  use  of  them  in  purification — Spnbolical  meaning
of  this  purification — Analogy  between  the  red  heifer,  the  scape -goat,
and  the  living  bird  let  loose  in  cleansing  the  leper — Why  was  the
heifer  wholly  burnt? — Meaning  of    the  use  of    the    ashes  of  the    rec^


360  Analysis  of  Contents.

heifer — Rabbinical  tradition  about  Solomon's  ignorance  of  the  meaning
of  this  rite — Selection  of  the  red  heifer — Ceremonial  in  its  sacrifice
and  burning — Selection  of  one  so  free  from  suspicion  of  defilement  as  to
administer  this  purification — Children  kept  in  special  localities  for  that
purpose— Ceremonial  connected  with  the  purification — How  many  red
heifers  had  been  offered  from  the  time  of  Moses — Symbolical  meaning  of
leprosy — Lepers  admitted  to  special  places  in  the  synagogue  -How  the
priests  were  to  examine  and  pronounce  judgment  on  leprosy — Explana-
tion of  Lev.  xiii.  12,  13 — Twofold  rites  in  restoring  the  healed  leper
— First,  or  social  stage  of  purification — Second  stage  after  seven  days'
seclusion — The  rites  to  be  observed  in  it — Rabbinical  account  of  the
service — The  meat-offering  at  the  purification  of  a  wife  suspected  of
adultery — Symbolical  meaning  of  it — The  priest  warns  the  woman  of
the  danger  of  perjury — The  words  of  the  curse  written  upon  the  roll,
washed  in  water  from  the  laver — This  mixture,  with  dust  of  the  sanc-
tuary, dmnk  by  the  woman — In  what  cases  alone  the  Rabbis  allowed  this
trial— How  the  accused  appeared  dressed  in  the  Temple — How  she  had
to  drink  the  bitter  water — Divine  judgments  upon  the  guilty — Cessation
of  this  rite  shortly  after  the  death  of  our  Lord — Remarks  of  the  Mishnak
in  recording  this  fact ,         .     Page  30I

Chap.  XIX. — On  Vows. — The  Nazarite's  Vow.     The  Offering  of

THE   FiRST-FrUITS   IN   THE  TeMPLE.

The  lawfulness  of  vows — Difference  between  the  Neder  and  the  Issar —
General  characteristics  of  the  Nazarite's  vow — Rabbinical  ordinances
on  vows — Their  binding  character — "Persons"  or  *' things  "  vowed —
Their  disposal — Rabbinical  protests  against  rash  vows — A  story  of
Simeon  the  Just — Frequency  of  vows  in  later  times,  and  traffic  in  them —
Derivation  of  the  term  //«2;2> —Spiritual  meaning  of  the  Nazarite's  vow^
Divine  ordinances  in  regard  to  it — The  Nazarite  compared  with  the
priest — Duration  of  the  vow — A  *' perpetual  Nazarite"  and  a  '*  Samson
Nazarite" — Rabbinical  ordinances -The  sacrifices  of  the  Nazarite,  and
the  ritual  in  the  Temple — St.  Paul  "at  charges"— The  offering  of  first-
fruits — Biccurim  and  Terumoth — On  whom  incumbent — Amount  of
them— The  "first  of  the  fleece"  and  "the  first  of  the  dough"—
General  amount  of  religious  contributions  due  from  every  Israelite —
The  presentation  of  the  first-fmits  an  act  of  family  religion— Its
meaning— The  setting  apart  of  the  first-fruits  in  field  or  orchard — Solemn
procession  to  Jerusalem — Reception  at  Jerusalem — Service  in  the  Temple
—References  to  the  "  first-fruits  "  in  the  New  Testament       •         .     Page  32a


INDEX;


Adultery,  woman  suspected  of,  rites
concerning,  318  ;  woman  suspected
of,  how  she  appeared  in  the  Temple,
320;  woman  suspected  of,  service
in  clearing  her  from  suspicion,  320.
See  also  Jealousy,

i^THROG,  238.

Altar  of  burnt-offering,  32,  131 ;  of
incense,  134.

Antonia,  castle  and  tower  ot,  10,  13.

A    HIKOMEN,  204,  209.

Ashes  of  Red  Heifers,  where  kept,
and  how  used,  311.

Atonement,  Day  of,  263;  time  of,
265  ;  sacrifices  on,  267;  services  of,
269;  Jewish  views  about,  287.

Azazel,  283.

Beth  Moked,  31.

BiCCURIM,  331.

Blood     of     sacrifices,     thrown      or

sprinkled,  89,  133.
Booths,  at  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  237.

Calendar,  arrangement  of,  165  ;
festive  cycles  of,  166 ;  adjustment
of  the   lunar   year,    170;    festive,

175-

Calpi,  272.
Candlestick,  135.
Chag,  166.

Chagigah  at  Passover,  186,  217.
Chanuchah.   See  Dedicatioriy  Feast  of,
Charoseth,  204,  208.
Confession  over  the  sacrifices,  88.
Contributions,  religious,  334 ;  gene-
ral amount  of,  334.
Counsellors,  honourable,  75.


Courses,  twenty-four,  61,  ^6\  heads
of,  66.

Courts.     See  Temple,

Cup  of  Thanksgiving,  209.

Day,   division  of,    174;    duration  of,

174.  •

Dancing,    maidens   of  Jerusalem,    at

certain  festivals,  286,  296.
Death,  defilement  of,  301  ;  how  long

it  lasted,  304.
Dedication,  P'east  of,  its  origin,  292  ;

its   reference   to   Christmas,    293 ;

its  observances,  293.
Defilement,  different  degrees  of,  304;

laws  concerning,  306.
Dress  of  high-priest  and  priests,  72.
Esther,  Feast  of.     See  Purim,
Fasts,  167;  public  and  private,  296;

four    great,    297 ;    how    observed,

298  ;  their  tendency,  299.
Festivals,  general  characteristics  of,

167  ;  post-Mosaic,  167.
Fruits,   First,   331  ;   when  presented,

333 ;    amount   of,    332  ;    how   set

apart,  336  ;  brought  to  Jerusalem,

337  ;  offered  in  the  Temple,  338  ;

Christian  application  of,  339.
GiZBARIN,   75.

Guard  of  Temple,  119;  captain  of,
119;  punishment  if  asleep,  120.

Hallel,  what  portion  of  the  Psalms,
191 ;    how  sung    at  the  Passover,

191  ;  how  often  sung  in  the  year,

192  ;  at  Feast  of  Tabernacles,
242,  Pentecost,  228,  Dedication,
293-


362


Index.


Heifer,  Red,  meaning  of,  306  ;
analogy  with  scapegoat,  307  ;
ashes  of,  and  how  used,  308,  311  ;
its  selection,  310  ;  ritual  at  its
offering,  310  ;  how  many  offered
since  time  of  Moses,  312.

Herbs,  bitter,  at  Paschal  Supper,  204.

High -PRIEST,  69  ;  anointing  of,  71  ;
by  anointing,  or  by  investiture,  71;
■  dress  of,  72  ;  girdle  of,  73  ;  dress
on  Day  of  Atonement,  266  ;  con-
fession of,  on  Day  of  Atonement,
271,  273,  277  ;  laying  skins  on
scapegoat,  272  ;  entering  Most
Holy  Place,  274;  prayer  of,  274,
284.

Holiness  (of  places),  degrees  of,  39.

Horn,  blowing  of,  on  New  Year's
Day,  259.

Ignorance,  sins  of,  loi.

Imposition  of  hands  on  sacrifices,  87.

Incense,  burning  of,  by  Zacharias,  129;
altar  of,  134  ;  how  prepared,  134;
lot  for,  136  ;  offering  of,    137.

Jealousy,  offering  of,  318  ;  waters  of,
under  what  circumstances  adminis-
tered, 319,  how  prepared,  320,
when  their  use  ceased,  321.  See
also  Adultery,

Jehovah,  name  of,  when  pronounced,
271.

Jerusalem,  ruins  of,  18  ;  memories  of,
2  ;  name,  3  ;  situation,  3,  4,  5  ;
splendour,  6  ;  approach  to,  6,  8  ;
population,  9  ;  walls,  9  ;  towers,
10  ;  hills,  II  ;  streets,  II  ;  princi-
pal buildings,  1 1  ;  Rabbinical  say-
ings about  it,  17.

Katholikin,  75.

Layer,  how  filled,  130.

Law,  weakness  and  unprofitableness  of,
264,  281.

Leayen,  how  removed  at  Passover,
188  ;  what  considered  as  such,  189.

Leper,  exclusion  of,  313  ;  examination
of  by  priests,  314  ;  purification  of
the  healed,  315  ;  sacrifices  brought
when  healed,  317.


Levites,  in  first  and  second  Temple,
63  ;  duties  of,  65  ;  disqualifications
of,  70.

Lot,  cast  for  services  in  Temple,  121,
130  ;  for  bearing  the  incense,  136.

LULAV,  238.

Mazzoth,  215.

MOED,    166.

MoED  Katoi^,  225,

Month,  how  its  commencement  ascer-
tained, 170;  when  full,  1 7 1.

Months,  names  of,  172.

Morning,  how  announced  in  the
Temple,  132.

Music  in  the  Temple,  52,  142.

Musical  Instruments  in  Temple,  53,
54.

Nazarite,  name  of,  326  ;  obligations
of,  327,  329;  perpetual  and  Sam-
son Nazarite,  328  ;  sacrifices  of,
330.

New  Moon,  how  ascertained  and
made  known,  170,  251  ;  Feast
of,  250,  sacrifices  on,  253,  ob-
servances   on,    254,      prayers   on,

255.

New  Year's  Day,  duplication  of,  172.
See  also  Feast  of  Trumpets.

NiCANOR,  Gate  of,  29.

Night,  duties  in  the  Temple  during,
117  ;  division  of,  119.

Offerings,  fixed  or  varying,  102.

Offering  of  sacrifices,  86  ;  burnt-
offering,  99  ;  sin-offering,  lOO ;
various  kinds  of,  102  ;  trespass-
offering,  105  ;  peace-offering,  106;
meat-offering,  109,  how  prepared,
109  ;  sold  to  offerer  in  the  Temple,
118.

Olives,  Mount  of,  7.

Omer,  presentation  of  first  ripe-barley
at  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,
224.

Paschal,  Feast,  196 ;  Jewish  traditions
as  to  time  of,  196  ;  supper,  arrange-
ment of,  197;  lamb,  how  prepared
at,  199,  meaning  of,  200;  supper,
posture  at,  201,  cup  at,  201,  202,


Index.


363


205,  order  of  service  at,  203,
prayers  at,  204,  order  at,  206,
when  observed  by  the  Lord,  211,
**  Hallel "  sung  at,  210.  See  also
Feast  of  Unleavened  Bj-ead.

Passover,  meaning  of,  177;  distinction
between  **  Egyptian"  and  *' per-
manent," 180;  pilgrims  to,  183;
preparation  for,  184,  187  ;  sacri-
fices of  Israelites  on,  187  ;  how  its
beginning  made  known,  189  ;  how
the  disciples  prepared  for  it,  190;
service  at  the  offering  of  the  lamb,
191.

Pentecost,  Feast  of,  225  ;  Jewish
traditions  about,  226 ;  sacrifices
on,  227  ;  ^'Hallel"  sung,  228  ;  pre-
sentation of  wave-loaves,  229.

Phylacteries,  74.

Prayer,  in  the  Temple,  124;  of
Rabbis,  125  ;  of  the  Lord,  127 ;
liturgical  formulas,  126;  attitude
in,  127;  of  priests  in  the  *'Hall  of
Polished  Stones,"  136;  of  people
during  the  burning  of  incense,  139  ;
of  high-priest,  274,  2B4.

Prayers,  Eulogies  and  Tephilloth,
128.

Preaching  not  the  exclusive  right  of
an  order,  68.

Priests'  quarter,  59 ;  twenty-four
courses,  59,  66,  how  restored
in  the  second  Temple,  63 ;
high -priest,  69 ;  officials  among,
75 ;  support  of,  77 ;  lettered  or
unlettered,  dZj  78 ;  duties  of  in
sacrifices,  %(i,  88 ;  blessing  of,
141.

Priesthood,  meaning  and  object  of,
60;  pretensions  of,  discouraged,
67 ;  disqualifications  for,  70 ;  ad-
mission to,  71.

Prophecy,  and  its  connection,  97.

Prosbul,  161.

Psalms,  daily  order  of  in  Temple,  143.
See  the  various  Feasts.

Punishments,  Divine  and  human,  43  ;
forty  stripes,  save  one,  44;  the
rebel's  beating,  43.


PURIM,  feast  of,  290 ;  origin,  meanmg,
and  controversy  about,  290  ;  fast
on  the  day  before,  291  ;  services
of,  292.

Purifications,  from  defilement  of
death,  301 ;  sacrifices  for  purification
from,  304 ;  from  defilement  con-
nected with  origin  of  life,  302  ;  of
Virgin  Mary,  302  ;  service  at  puri*
fication  from  defilement  of  death,
310  ;  of  healed  leper,  see  Leper,

Reverence,  in  the  Temple,  40.

Sabbath,  institution  of,  145 ;  how
kept  by  the  Rabbis,  147,  149 ;
day's  journey,  148 ;  commence-
ment of,  how  known,  150;  rest  in
the  Temple,  65  ;  preparation  for,
151;  in  the  Temple,  152;  service
of  in  Temple,  158 ;  psalm  and
hymn  in  Temple,  158;  its  mean-
ing, 163.

Sabbatical  Year,  159 ;  ordinance  of
Rabbis,  166.

Sacrifice  of  white  cock  on  Day  of
Atonement,  94;  morning,  130.

Sacrifices,  their  obligation,  79  ;  their
permanence,  96 ;  symbolical  and
typical  meaning,  80 ;  fundamental
idea  of,  81  ;  general  arrangement
of,  82  ;  requisites  of,  83  ;  animals
used  for,  84;  private  and  public,
holy  and  less  holy,  85  ;  what  done
by  offerer,  86 ;  laying  on  of  hands
and  confession,  87 ;  waving  of,  88  ;
various  duties  of  the  priests  in
offering  them,  90 ;  parts  belonging
to  the  priests,  91;  views  of  the
ancient  Synagogue  about,  92 ;
Jewish  lament  for  the  want  of
them,  93  ;  evening  and  morning,
at  what  hour,  115.  See  also
Offerings  and  the  various  Feasts.

Sagan,  75.

Salutation,  at  parting  of  priests,
117;  of  altar  at  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles, 248.

Scapegoat,  272-277;  meaning  of  the
rites  connected  with  it,  279.  See
also  Atone?nenL


364


Index.


Service,  daily,  time  occupied  in  it,
116;  morning,  132.  See  also
Sabbath,  Nro)  Moony  and  the
various  Festivals.

Sheaf,  so-called  first  ripe  at  the  Feast
of  Unleavened  Bread,  222.

Shewbread,  152 ;  table  of,  153,
vessels  on  it,  154,  how  ranged,
154;  how  prepared,  and  shape  of
it,  155 ;  service  at  changing  it
on  every  Sabbath,  156  ;  meaning
of,  157.

Simeon  the  Just,  130,  325.

Singing  in  Temple,  56.

Solomon,  his  supposed  ignorance  of  the
meaning  of  the  Red  Heifer,  309.

Stationary  men,  168.

Substitution.  See  Sacrifices  and
Blood.

Supper,  Paschal,  198.

Symbols  and  Types,  meaning  of,  80.

Synagogues  in  Jerusalem,  13.

Tabernacles,  Feast  of,  232;  mean-
ing of,  233  ;  time  of,  234 ;  charac-
teristic rites  of,  235  ;  sacrifices  at,
239  ;  ceremony  of  water-drawing,
241  ;  ^'Hallel"  sung,  242;  last,  or
**  great  day  "  of  the  Feast  of,  243  ;
illummation  of  Temple,  245  ;
psalms  sung  at  the  Feast,  248 ;
salutation  of  altar  at,  248 ;  the
only  unfulfilled  type,  249.

Temple,  extent  of,  13 ;  gates  of,  14,  25 ;
*'  Beautiful  Gate"  of,  26;  area  and
general  appearance  of,  16;  "Royal
Bridge"  into,  20;  porches  of,  21;
colonnades,  22 ;  *'  Court  of  the
Gentiles,"  23;  the  "CM"  25;
*'  Court  of  the  Women,"  27 ;
courts  and  chambers,  29,  31  ;
courts  of  Israel  and  of  the  Priests,
30  ;  description  of  in  Mishnah,  31 ;
duties  in,  and  arrangements  of,  121;
meal  at  night  in,  118;  altar  of
burnt-offering,  33 ;  laver,  35  ;
water  supply  of,  35 ;  the  Holy
House  itself,  36 ;  differences  be-
tween first  and  second,  38 ;  extent


of,  45  ;  treasury,  46  ;  contributions
to,  46  ;  tribute  and  amount  of,  47,
49,  50;  money-changers  in,  48
revenues,  how  employed,  50
music,  52,  142  ;  singing  in,  56
St.  John's  allusions  to  its  ser-
vices, 112;  at  night  in,  115,
116.

Terumoth,  331.

Time,  division  of,  174.

Tonsure  of  classes  of  the  Nazarile,
313.

Treasury  of  Temple,  27.

Trespass,  certain  or  doubtful,  105  5
offering,  see  Offerings.

Trumpets,  or  Alms-boxes,  in  Treasury
of  Temple,  27 ;  Feast  of,  256 ;
prayers  on,  260  ;  Rabbinical  views
of  its  import,  258  ;  reference  to  in
New  Testament,  262  ;  blasts  of,
53,  252.

Types.     See  also  Symbols,

Unleavened  Bread,  Feast  of,  215  ;
meaning,  215 ;  condemnation  of
the  Saviour  at,  217  ;  mode  of  cut-
ting first  ripe  barley  at,  221  ;
sacrifice  at,  216  ;  when  and  how
this  sheaf  presented,  224.

Virgin  Mary,  purification  of,  302.
Vows,  dift'erent  classes  of,  322 ;   great

number  of,  325  ;  how  paid,  324  j

when  valid,  323.

Watches  of  the  night,  115,  119.
Washing  before  ministry,  121.
Wave-loaves  at  Pentecost,  229.
Wave-sheaf.  See  Feast  of  Unleavened

Bread.
Weeks,  Feast  of.     See  Pentecost.
Witnesses   to    appearance    of   New

Moon,  251.
Worshippers,  how  enter  and  leave,

23.
Wood-offering,  Feast  of,  295 ;   its

observances,  296.
Year,  sacred  and  civil,   173;  how  to

ascertain  the  current  Jewish,  \1^\

division  of,  257,


INDEX   TO   SCRIPTURE    REFERENCES


Genesis.

Page

l 300

ii.  3 146

xii.  3 178

XV. 197

xxviii.  20 324

xxxii 32

xl.  9-15  ........  202

xlix.  26 326

Exodus.

»i 179

„     3 185

,f     6  .  .«• 180

«     8-11    199

.,     15 ^77

..     16    181

„     25    182

...    33.  39 215

xiii.  4 172

„     5 182

f,    8  199,  207

XV 52,  159

Xvi  36    109

tix.  1-3 226

„     5,6 67

f,     7 226

„     8 226

„     10-16 226

.»     16-19 55

XX.  18. 55

xxil  29 331

xxiii.  10,  n  ....   160

«     14 177

„     14-16    ....   178
»»     14-17    ••••  226

„     15   172,  183

„     16.  .227,  233,  333

„     19    331,  332

xxiv 82,  200

,,     18-23    ....  177

XXV.  2 107,  331

„     23,  etc 153

„     25,  31    ....   135

»»     29 154

•»     30 153


Page


,  Exodus.

XXIX.  5,  6 60

„    6   326

..     27 331

XXX.  II,  12 60

„       12 49

„       13 331

...  34 134

xxxi.  15 160

xxxii.  26     58

xxxiii.  32 258

xxxiv.  18-20  ....  181

„     22..  178, 227,  233

,.     26 331

XXXV.  5  331

»>      13 153

,,      29 107

xxxvi.  3,  6. .... .  331

xxxix.  30    326

„       36    153

xl.6    86


Leviticus.


...  168
.90,  91
...  83
. . .  109
,..  108


109


2.  9

3,  10   ..I

4-7

i.  i-S    2ib

,  2,  8    t68

,  3-5,  etc 108

,  4.  5    107

^  3    103

,  3,  22 102

,  6-T7 90

,  II,  12,  20. . ..  308

,  13 85,  103

,  14 306

,  15 87

,  23 103

»  25 89

,  28 104

»  31  ••••  91

,  z 102


Leviticus.

Page

V.  1-13     lOI

»»  6 104

i,  II    83

„  II,  12 IC9

„  12    78

t>  13    •  104

,.  15    105

vi.  2     105

„    T2 83

„    I2-l6      121

„  17 85

,,  20 30,  109

,,21 199

vii.  I 85

„    3 106

„    II 107

„   II,  etc......  108

»   12 107

ff   14 331

„   16 107

f,   29,  34 218

„   30,  32 108

,,   32 108

viii.  9 326

„     25-29 108

,,     26    330

ix.  3,  15 104

X.  12    85

„  15    108

>»„i7    105

xii 302

,,    6  104

xiii.  12,  13  ..314,  315

xiv.  1-9 315

„     10    104

„     10-20 315

„  12.101,105,106,108

„     13    8s

„     21 102

„     24 88

.,     29    315

XV.  5   100

„    14,  29 104

xvi 266,  281,  284

,,     2 269


Leviticus.

Pa.ee

xvi.  3 267,  283

„    4 266

„     8, 10,  24....  272
„    9,10,  26....  283

«     13    103

„    20    280

„    21.87,124,281,288

„  '  22    278

>,     24    270

»,    31    166

....  33    264

XVll.  II    81,  92

xix.  20    ...,..,,   105

...    23-25 334

XXI. 304

.»    II  327

„       32      326

xxii.  12 331

„     23 107

,,     29,  30    ....  78

xxiiL   237

».     3    150

w     4-22 177

„     5    180

«     7    i8r

„  lo-ii    ....   222

,f  II  .. ..  108,  222

„     15 147

t»  15,  5.  32,  39  147

„  15,  16    .♦..   226

„  16,  17    ....  3.33

„  19  ... .  107,  228

„     20 io3

„     21 226

w     24 256

»  24,  32,39..   223

„  25,  32    ....   23s

„  26-32     ....   266

„  27-32     ....   284

,f     32 166

»  35,  36    ....   235

„  39  • . .  •  234,  235

„     40 236

„  42,  43    ••••   236

»,     56 177


366


Index  to  Scripture  References.


Leviticus.

Pajre

xxlv.  8   150

XXV.  5,  II 327

ff    6 160

„    8    147

„    9    55»  266

„.  23 178

xxvii.  2-8 324

„  9,  10  ....  324
„  11-27  ....  324
„      16 78

xxxiii.  34,  43 ... .  233

Numbers.

i. 83

,,3 86

iii.  3    •••••     70

iv.  4 86

„  7 150,  153

V.  4 331

„  10-12 106

n    "-31 518

»    15    83,  109

„    19-22 320

,,25     108

vi 326

.,  2    326

*,  3-4 327

„  7.... 304,  327,  328
„  8 326

»*  ;io •••••  104

,,    12 lOI

*»  13-21 329

9»    14 104

»»  14,  ^5    329

f »  le,  20  330

,y  20 108

„    21 330

V..24-26 I4t

viii.  24,  25 70

IX.  1-5     182

„  3-5 180

^  9-11   ....  172,  181

*,  9-T2 225

„  17 306

X.  i-io    252

y    2 142

,,    10     252

xiv.  4 84

XV.  i-io 239

b   1-12 83

#.    18-21    333

.,    19 •••.  331

»»  2C 78

„  20-21      331

»,  24        103

„  24-26     85

..  37-41      137

tviii.  7    ........     6t

.,     8-11 331

„     12,  13   ....  331

xix 268,  301


Numbers.

Page

xix.  7,  8 305

».     9,  17  304

>t     II,  12 327

„     Ti-i6  ....18,  304

»     21    305

„     22    304

XXV.  7,  8    44

xxviii 100

„      1-12 83

„      4  ........   116

„      4-8 115

„      9,10.52,150,158

*>      II     253

„      n-i5..252,253

»      15    1*03

„      16,  17 177

„      18 181

»>  19.  24  ....  117
„  26  . . .  226,  227
„  26-30  ....  228
„      26-31  ....  227

,,      27    228

xxix 110,  270

f,     I    256

».     5 103

„     7-11  ..  267,  284

„     II 266

„     12,  etc 239

„     12-38    ....  248

M     16 285

„     36-38    ....  249

XXX.  2 322

„     3-8 ...  324

„     26-28  323

xxxi.  19 304

„     41 331

Deuteronomy.

i.  1-6 162

V.  15   146

vi.  4,  etc. 137

„  4-8 162

V..4-9 137

viii.  8  .. ........  332

ix.  13-22    162

xi.  13-21    137

xiv.  22    ** 162

XV.  1-6 160

»    14-.. 161

„^  23..........  162

xvi.  I 172

„     2,  16,  17....  181

♦»     3      215

„     10,  16. . ....  227

»»     13,  16 233

„     I3»  17 236

»     16,  17 183

>,..  17    217

xvii.  14 162

xviii.  3 78

»»    4    331


Deuteronomy.

Page

xviii.   II  ». 333

xxi.^  3 306

xxiii.  18 323

,,     22-24    .....324

xxvi.  2    332

,f     2-" 331

»     3-iP  •  *  334,  339

>*     5-11 207

,,     12-19    ....   162
„     15  ....  124,  332

xxvii 162

,,7.. 107,  187,  217
xxviii 162

».     58,  59-..-     45

XXXI.  lo  . . . .  233,  235

„     10,  II   ....   160

„     10-13    ....  248

xxxii 52,  158

»»     3    271

„  ^  i6 326

xxxiii.  10  99

Joshua.

1.8 332

v.  10  182

yi.  15,  etc 149

ix.  21,  23,  27.. . .  64

xxi.  16 129

Judges.

«•  30,31    324

XIV.  8 328

XV.  15 328

X  X.  26 297

1  Samuel.

i.  3-7 183

„.ii    324

vi.  7    ..........  306

vii.  6 297

XX.  5,  24 250

,>   6,  29 250

2  Samuel.

i.  10    320

viii.  18    6]

XV.  7,  8 324

I  Kings.

i.  33,  38 3"

ill.  4    99

vi.  1-38 173

viii ..125,  249

„     2  ..173,  234

„     18    128

„     30-52 125

„     63    107

ix.  3    41

X.  5 20


1  Kings.

Page
XXI.  3 159

M       27       297

2  Kings.

ii.  12  326

iv.  23 250

xi.  9    ..•••....,  it3

xvi.  18    ........  151

xxii. 46

xxiii.  21 1S2

XXV.  18 75

1  Chronicles.
ix.  32 156

,,.33 116

xviii.  16 61

xxiii.  5    54

,,     24-27    ....     70

„     30 116

xxvi.  28-32    ....    64

2  Chronicles.

V.  3   234

»  12    117

,,13,14 57

„  42    117

vii.  1  248,  294

„.  8,  9 234

viii.  13    ....  182,  233

xiii.  10,  II 153

XX.  3   297

xxiii.  8    ........  iiS

xxiv 46

„     6-11  ......     50

xxix  23 88

XXX.  15  ....  177,  182
xxxvi.  21 159

Ezra.

ii.  40-42 64

„  43-58 i^

,,65    It

iii.  4    •••  233

„  10,  II    57

iv.  3    4*

vi     IQ. .........  182

,.,,  19-21 178

vii.  24 64

viii.  5,  18,  19....  64

«     20 61

Nehemiah.

ii.  1 179

vii.  43,  45 $4

»    60 64

,,.67 56

vni.  1-12    261

„     15,  18 237

X.  1-27   29®


Index  to  Scripture  References.


367


Nrhemiah.

Page

«•  3a»  34 50

»,  32    159

f,  34    ••.. 295

»».  35    332

XI.  17 125

»"•  27-40   57

xiii.  31    295

Esther.

iii.  7 179,  290

vii.  17-24 290

ix.  27 290

Psalms.

vi 107

XV 248

xvi.  5 202

,.5,6 61

xxlii.   ..•• 202

xxiv •  143

xxix 248

,,     8,  etc 257

XXX.     339

xxxii.  I,  2 81

xxxiii.  2 54

„       15 258

3di. 126

xlviii 143

„      2,  12,  13..       4

1.  6,  7 216

,,  16,  etc 248

ii.  5 82

»»    7 309

>»    17 107

»?    19 99

Iiv 107

Ivi.  12 107

Ixix    28     . , 258

Ixxii ••....  126

Ixxviii.  38 45

hudx »^...     18

,   "     „6 197

Ixxx.  8    37

Ixxxi.  3.-55,  144,  251

„      6,  etc 248

Ixxxii 144

„  .    5,  etc 248

Ixxxiv.  9     81

ixxxv.  I 178

Ixxxix 126

xcii 144

,,...2,  3 "6

xciii 144

xciv.    144

„     16,  etc 248

cii 299

civ.  27 163

cvi.  ., 126

cxiii.  ,.  192,  242,  254

cxiv 192

Cxv. 3x3,  260    \


Psalms.

Page

cxvi 260

„     13  .... 202

„     17,  18   ....  107

cxvii 260

cxviii.  ..213,  242,  244

„ 254,  260

,*       I 242

*»       25    244

„       25,  26  . . .   192

»»       29    243

cxx 192,  209,  210

cxx.  to  cxxxiv. . ,     30

cxxi 299

cxxii 5,  337

»      2  338

„      2,  3 6

cxxvii 164

cxxx 299

cxxxi.. .,.«,,.,.  257

cxxxiv 116

cxxxvi 192

cxxxvii 210

cxli.  2 129

cxiiv.  9  ,,..,...     55

cxiv.  16 163

cl 126,  338

Proverbs.
XX.  25 324

ECCLESIASTES.

vii.  23 309

Song  of  Solomon.
"•  17 4

Isaiah.

i.  1 1,  etc 79

,,13    251

»»  15    125

„  18  ....  94,  273,  309

11-3 2

V.  8 159

yiii.  8 178

ix.  I 247

xii.  3   242,  243

xiv.  2 178

XXV.  6-9 233

XXX.  10 56

xxxvii.  30 159

Hi.  r3 98

,,  II,  12    iz6

liii 98

„    6 ,..  284

>..   7 123

Ivui.  I 55

„     13  ....  145,  161

1x1.  1-3   159

Ixii.  4 3


Isaiah.

,   ...  Page

IXIU.  9 153

Ixv.  7 320

Ixvi.  23 251

Jeremiah.

xi.  21 37

XXV.  15   202

xxiv.  18,  23    ....  298

^xxi.  6    337

„     34    288

xli.  I   298

li   7... 202

Iii- 24 75

Lamentations.

iii.  66 197

iv.  I 18

Ezekiel.
i'.;    ••• 159

y"- 12 159

IX.  2,  etc 262

„  4-6 182

XX.    12.  . 145

xl 288

xliv.  18  73

yy     25,  etc 304

xlvi.  1 251

Daniel.

X.  5 266

xii.  6 266

HOSEA.

ii.  II    251

iv.  14 331

«.3    178

>»  4    304

Joel,

f:  7 37

u.  13   299

Amos.

iii.  6 259

vi:.5    54

viii.  5 251,  256

Jonah.

i- 16    324

iii.  10 299

MiCAH.

vi.  6    79

X.  2 159

Zephaniah.
y   xo-xi   13


Zephaniah.

Page
I.  12 188

Haggai.

ii.  3 38

.,7 38

»»  13    304

Zechariah.

iii;  3>  4 266

vii 297

viii 297

.»    19 297

IX.  16 326

xiv.  16,  21 234

>.     20    235

Malachi.

ii-  7 58

in.  8-10 49

St.  Matthew.

i-.3 38

VI.  2    • .     29

ii  10 299

V  ^3 127

viii.  4 301

ix.  14 299

»  23 s6

X.  9,  10 42

„  29    3x6

xii.  4  153

»   5 65.85

xiv.  25    119

„     26-32 184

XV.  5   46

xvii.  24 47

XX.  2     49

»    3   174

„    17 188

xxi.  8,  9 243

„     12    25

,,12,  13 190

xxiii.  14 47

„     19 90

„     27 185

xxiv.  2 22

„     20 163

„.   31 253

xxvL  ^^ 177

„     18 ..184

,.     21-26    ....  208
„     26-28    ....  196

»       30 2T3

„..  59-68    ....  44

xxvii.  45 151

,,,..51 37

xxviii.  I  ........  147

»      19 13'


368

St.  Mark.

Pagfe

11.  18  299

»,   27,  28 145

f,   27  148

vii.  3  205

„  II 81

.»»  11-13 323

IX.  49 84

xii.  41 28

xiii.  35  120

xiv.  I,  12  177

,,  12-16 184

„  17,  18 211

„  22  208

„  26,  32 184

.»  33-37 221

„  66  12

XV.  25 174

»>  34  151

».,  42 ..  150

XVI.  2 147

St.  Luke.

i.  8-10 124

»>  9 129

».  10  115

;,  22   142

11.  22  302

„  22-24 27

»,  24  102

y,    41,  42 183

.»  41-49 184

IV.  29 44

V.  33  299

„  35  266

vi.  I  150

»;.  " 153

Vll.  12 39

»,  38 201

X:  35  49

XI.  I  127

xii.  38 120

XIV.  I 163

»..   5 147

XVII.  12  313

xviii.  12  ... .  147,  167
„  12  ... .  298.  299

xix.  41  I

*.  44  18  .

XXI.  I 28

xxii.  1 177

,,  7-13 t84

„  II,  12  ....  211
„  17  ....  205,  212

„  19 208

„  20 213

„..  39 184

xxiii.  44 151

xxiv.  13 143

icxviii.  12  ......  167


Index  to  Scripture  References.


St.  John.

Page

11.  13-18 190

»»  14  25

M  15  49

.»  19  293

ill.  14-15  260

iv  35  291

V.  I 291

vi.  4  291

vii.  20 28

„  37 232,  243

v..  38 244

viii.  12  ....  245,  248

„  20  28

.»»  59  44

IX. '5  245

X.  22  291,  294

„  22,  23 289

,>  23  23

».3i  44

XI.  55 185

,,,56 166

xii.  12,  13 242

xiii.  4,  5 212

„  5 205

„  10  ....  121,  130

,,  12-20 212

„  23-25 202

,»  24   211

„  25   208

♦.»  29   194

XIV.  18  208

xviii.  I  184

,,  I,  2  211

„  3-12 219

„  15,  16  ....  113
„  28.. 186,218,221

„  39 188

xix.  14  ....  174,  188

>,  23  73

„  27  113

»  31  150

XX.  I  147

„   2  113

M   15 222

Acts.

i.  x8  219

ii 226

„  I 215,  227

„  15  115

,j.47  23

lii 26

,,  I  116

iv.  I,  etc 119

,,6  113

vi.  7  58

vii 67

„  57.  58 44

X.  9 116


Acts.

Page

xu.  12 113

xviii.  18 330

XX.  16 227

xxi.  20-25 331

„  23,  etc 326

„,^  31 10,  25

xxiii.  5  67

xxvil.  9 265

Romans.

iii.  25 282

viii.  13  339

„  21,  22 164

.»,  23  340

IX.  16 339

xi.  16 340

xvi.  5 339,  340

1  Corinthians.
V.  7  ....177,  188,  216
„  7,  8 181

X.  16  209,  213

„  16,  17 200

xi.  24 208,  209

i,   27 185

*»  23-29  199

XV.  20 322

„  20-23 — 339,340
»>.  52 253

XVI.  8 227

.»     15    ....  339»  340

2  Corinthians.

xi..,24 45

xiii.  2 117

xvi.  I,  2 158

Ephesians.

V.  8 262

,,14    262

COLOSSIANS.

ii.  16,  17.. . .  250,  251

2  Timothy.
ii.  15   qo

Hebrews.

V.  4 61

».  7-9 214

,>..9 146

vii.  19 264

»    20 95

♦,    27 •••  265

.viii- 4,  5 79

ix 281

„   2     123

„  4    134


Hebrews.*

Pagre

IX.    7     28<'

„  7,  II,  12  ....  263

„  9 28c

„  II,  12,  26  ... .  288

„  13 268

»,  13,  14    308

„  15 282

,,  26 282

X 281

,,  I 263,  282

„  1-24    82

„  3 102

,,  4 80,  264

,,  II    58

„   II,  12 96

,,26    . 288

,,  26,  27 42

xiii.  II,  12 38

James.
i.  18    339,  340

I  Peter.
i.  20    214

I  John.
ii.  2 214

Revelation.

jt.13 73

"1.  5    71

,,    20 106

iv.  8-11 57

v.  8  ....  52,  129,  138

.»  9-12    57

»>  13    57

VI   13 138

vii.  2,  3 183

„    9,  10 249

„    10,  12  57

viii.  I,  3,  4 138

.»»     2 253

IX.  4    183

X.  7 253

xi.  15 322

xiii.  8 214

xiv.  2,3 52

„     4  ..  322,  339,  340

XV.  2     .....     ....       52

M    3.  4    164

»,.  6 72,  73

XVI.  15 112,    I2Q

XX 146

„     1,  3,  4,  6. . ..  192

M     6,7 57

,,^    8 72

xxi.  4,  etc 233

„     16,  19,  20  . .  73


London :    Pardon  and  Softs,  Printers,  Paternoster  Row.


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process.
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide
Treatment  Date:  Feb.  2005

PreservationTechnologies

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION

111  Thomson  Park  Drive
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066
(724)779-2111


