WALL  OF  JERUSALEM.


From  a  riwto^raf>h.


SK  ETCHES


OF


JEWISH    SOCIAL    LIFE


IN


THE    DAYS     OF    CHRIST.


REV.     DR.     EDERSHEIM,

AUTHOR    OF     "THE    TEMPLE:    ITS    MINISTRY    AND    SERVICES,'
"THE    BIBLE    HISTORY,"    ETC.


THE     RELIGIOUS     TRACT     SOCIETY,

56,     PATF,RNOSTER     Row;    65,     ST.     PAUL'S    CHURCHYARD;

AND     164,     PICCADILLY.


LONDON:

PARDON  AND  SC&S,  PRINTERS,
WINE  OFFICE  COURf,  FLEET  STREET,  B.C.


PREFACE.


THE  object  of  this  volume  is  kindred  to  that  of  my
previous  book  on  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services  as
they  were  at  the  Time  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  both  I  have
wished  to  transport  the  reader  into  the  land  of  Palestine
at  the  time  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  apostles,  and  to  show
him,  so  far  as  lay  within  the  scope  of  each  book,  as  it
were,  the  scene  on  which,  and  the  persons  among  whom
the  events  recorded  in  New  Testament  history  had  taken
place.  For  I  believe,  that  in  measure  as  we  realise  its
surroundings — so  to  speak,  see  and  hear  for  ourselves  what
passed  at  the  time,  enter  into  its  ideas,  become  familiar
with  its  habits,  modes  of  thinking,  its  teaching  and  worship
— shall  we  not  only  understand  many  of  the  expressions
and  allusions  in  the  New  Testament,  but  also  gain  fresh
evidence  of  the  truth  of  its  history  alike  from  its  faith-
fulness to  the  picture  of  society,  such  as  we  know  it  to
have  been,  and  from  the  contrast  of  its  teaching  and  aims
to  those  of  the  contemporaries  of  our  Lord.

For,  a  careful  study  of  the  period  leaves  this  conviction
on  the  mind :  that — with  reverence  be  it  said — Jesus  Christ
was  strictly  of  His  time,  and.  that  the  New  Testament  is,
in  its  narratives,  language,  and  allusions,  strictly  true  to  the
period  and  circumstances  in  which  its  events  are  laid.  But
in  another,  and  far  more  important,  aspect  there  is  no


vi  Preface.

similarity  between  Christ  and  His  period.  "  Never  man n
— of  that,  or  any  subsequent  period — "  spake  like  this
man  ; "  never  man  lived  or  died  as  He.  Assuredly,  if  He
was  the  Son  of  David,  He  also  is  the  Son  of  God,  the
Saviour  of  the  world.

In  my  book  on  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services,
I  endeavoured  to  carry  the  reader  with  me  into  the
Sanctuary,  and  to  make  him  witness  all  connected  with  its
institutions,  its  priesthood,  and  its  solemnities.  In  this
book  I  have  sought  to  take  him  into  ordinary  civil
society,  and  to  make  him  mingle  with  the  men  and  women
of  that  period,  see  them  in  their  homes  and  families,  learn
their  habits  and  manners,  and  follow  them  in  their
ordinary  life — all,  as  illustrative  of  New  Testament  history ;
at  the  same  tiaie  endeavouring  to  present  in  a  popular
form  the  scenes  witnessed.

Another,  and  perhaps  the  most  important  part  in  its
bearing  on  Christianity,  yet  remains  to  be  done :  to  trace
the  progress  of  religious  thought  —  as  regards  the  canon
of  Scripture,  the  Messiah,  the  law,  sin,  and  salvation — to
describe  the  character  of  theological  literature,  and  to
show  the  state  of  doctrinal  belief  at  the  time  of  our  Lord.
It  is  here  especially  that  we  should  see  alike  the  kinship
in  form  and  the  almost  contrast  in  substance  between  what
Judaism  was  at  the  time  of  Christ,  and  the  teaching  and
the  kingdom  of  our  Blessed  Lord.  But  this  lay  quite  outside
the  scope  of  the  present  volume,  and  belongs  to  a  larger  work
for  which  this  and  my  previous  book  may,  in  a  sense,  be
regarded  as  forestudies.  Accordingly,  where  civil  society
touched,  as  on  so  many  points  it  does,  on  the  theological  and
the  doctrinal,  it  was  only  possible  to  "sketch"  it,  leaving  the
outlines  to  be  rilled  up.  To  give  a  complete  representation


Preface.  vii

of  the  times  of  our  Lord,  in  all  their  bearings — to  show  not
only  who  they  were  among  whom  Jesus  Christ  moved,
but  what  they  knew,  thought,  and  believed — and  this  as
the  frame,  so  to  speak,  in  which  to  set  as  a  picture  the  life
of  our  Blessed  Lord  Himself,  such  must  now  be  the  work,
to  which,  with  all  prayerful  reverence  and  with  most
earnest  study,  I  shall  henceforth  set  myself.

It  seemed  needful  to  state  this,  in  order  to  explain  both
the  plan  of  this  book  and  the  manner  of  its  treatment.
I  will  only  add,  that  it  embodies  the  results  of  many  years'
study,  in  which  I  have  availed  myself  of  every  help  within
my  reach.  It  might  seem  affectation,  were  I  to  enumerate
the  names  of  all  the  authorities  consulted  or  books  read
in  the  course  of  these  studies.  Those  mentioned  in  the
foot-notes  constitute  but  a  very  small  proportion  of  them.

Throughout,  my  constant  object  has  been  to  illustrate  the
New  Testament  history  and  teaching.  Even  the  "  Scripture
Index "  at  the  close  will  show  in  how  many  instances  this
has  been  attempted.  Most  earnestly  then  do  I  hope,  that
these  pages  may  be  found  to  cast  some  additional  light
on  the  New  Testament,  and  that  they  will  convey  fresh
evidence — to  my  mind  of  the  strongest  kind — and  in  a
new  direction,  of  the  truth  "  of  those  things  which  are  most
surely  believed  among  us."  And  now  it  only  remains  at
the  close  of  these  investigations  once  more  to  express  my
own  full  and  joyous  belief  in  that  grand  truth  to  which
all  leads  up— that  "CHRIST  IS  THE  END  OF  THE  LAW


ALFRED  EDERSHEIM.

THE  VICARAGE,  LODERS,  BRIDPORT  :
November,   1876.


vi  Preface.

similarity  between  Christ  and  His  period.  "  Never  man n
— of  that,  or  any  subsequent  period — "  spake  like  this
man  ; "  never  man  lived  or  died  as  He.  Assuredly,  if  He
was  the  Son  of  David,  He  also  is  the  Son  of  God,  the
Saviour  of  the  world.

In  my  book  on  The  Temple,  its  Ministry  and  Services,
I  endeavoured  to  carry  the  reader  with  me  into  the
Sanctuary,  and  to  make  him  witness  all  connected  with  its
institutions,  its  priesthood,  and  its  solemnities.  In  this
book  I  have  sought  to  take  him  into  ordinary  civil
society,  and  to  make  him  mingle  with  the  men  and  women
of  that  period,  see  them  in  their  homes  and  families,  learn
their  habits  and  manners,  and  follow  them  in  their
ordinary  life — all,  as  illustrative  of  New  Testament  history ;
at  the  same  time  endeavouring  to  present  in  a  popular
form  the  scenes  witnessed.

Another,  and  perhaps  the  most  important  part  in  its
bearing  on  Christianity,  yet  remains  to  be  done :  to  trace
the  progress  of  religious  thought  —  as  regards  the  canon
of  Scripture,  the  Messiah,  the  law,  sin,  and  salvation — to
describe  the  character  of  theological  literature,  and  to
show  the  state  of  doctrinal  belief  at  the  time  of  our  Lord.
It  is  here  especially  that  we  should  see  alike  the  kinship
in  form  and  the  almost  contrast  in  substance  between  what
Judaism  was  at  the  time  of  Christ,  and  the  teaching  and
the  kingdom  of  our  Blessed  Lord.  But  this  lay  quite  outside
the  scope  of  the  present  volume,  and  belongs  to  a  larger  work
for  which  this  and  my  previous  book  may,  in  a  sense,  be
regarded  as  forestudies.  Accordingly,  where  civil  society
touched,  as  on  so  many  points  it  does,  on  the  theological  and
the  doctrinal,  it  was  only  possible  to  "sketch"  it,  leaving  the
outlines  to  be  filled  up.  To  give  a  complete  representation


Preface.  vii

of  the  times  of  our  Lord,  in  all  their  bearings — to  show  not
only  who  they  were  among  whom  Jesus  Christ  moved,
but  what  they  knew,  thought,  and  believed — and  this  as
the  frame,  so  to  speak,  in  which  to  set  as  a  picture  the  life
of  our  Blessed  Lord  Himself,  such  must  now  be  the  work,
to  which,  with  all  prayerful  reverence  and  with  most
earnest  study,  I  shall  henceforth  set  myself.

It  seemed  needful  to  state  this,  in  order  to  explain  both
the  plan  of  this  book  and  the  manner  of  its  treatment.
I  will  only  add,  that  it  embodies  the  results  of  many  years'
study,  in  which  I  have  availed  myself  of  every  help  within
my  reach.  It  might  seem  affectation,  were  I  to  enumerate
the  names  of  all  the  authorities  consulted  or  books  read
in  the  course  of  these  studies.  Those  mentioned  in  the
foot-notes  constitute  but  a  very  small  proportion  of  them.

Throughout,  my  constant  object  has  been  to  illustrate  the
New  Testament  history  and  teaching.  Even  the  "  Scripture
Index "  at  the  close  will  show  in  how  many  instances  this
has  been  attempted.  Most  earnestly  then  do  I  hope,  that
these  pages  may  be  found  to  cast  some  additional  light
on  the  New  Testament,  and  that  they  will  convey  fresh
evidence — to  my  mind  of  the  strongest  kind — and  in  a
new  direction,  of  the  truth  "  of  those  things  which  are  most
surely  believed  among  us."  And  now  it  only  remains  at
the  close  of  these  investigations  once  more  to  express  my
own  full  and  joyous  belief  in  that  grand  truth  to  which
all  leads  up— that  "CHRIST  IS  THE  END  OF  THE  LAW


ALFRED  EDERSHEIM.


THE  VICARAGE,  LODERS,  BRIDPORT  :
November,   1876.


CONTENTS.


CHA#.

i.    PALESTINE  EIGHTEEN  CENTURIES  AGO      .....'

n.    JEWS  AND  GENTILES  IN  "THE  LAND" 14

in.     IN  GALILEE  AT  THE  TIME  OF  OUR  LORD 30

iv.    TRAVELLING    IN    PALESTINE:     ROADS,    INNS,     HOSPITALITY,

CUSTOM-HOUSE  OFFICERS,  TAXATION,  PUBLICANS      .        .    42

/  v.     IN  JUDAEA 59

"  vi.    JEWISH  HOMES     . 86

vn.    THE  UPBRINGING  OF  JEWISH  CHILDREN    .        .        .        .        .103

VIIL     SUBJECTS  OF  STUDY.      HOME  EDUCATION  IN  ISRAEL  ;  FEMALE

EDUCATION.     SCHOOLS  AND  SCHOOLMASTERS     .        .        .122

ix.  MOTHERS,  DAUGHTERS,  AND  WIVES  IN  ISRAEL.        .        .        .139

x.     IN  DEATH  AND  AFTER  DEATH 161

^  XL  JEWISH  VIEWS  ON  TRADE,  TRADESMEN,  AND  TRADES'  GUILDS   182

/    xii.    COMMERCE 199

XIH.  AMONG  THE  PEOPLE,  AND  WITH  THE  PHARISEES      .        .        .213

xiv.    THE  "FRATERNITY"  OF  PHARISEES 227

xv.  RELATION  OF  THE  PHARISEES  TO  THE  SADDUCEES  AND  ESSENES,

AND   TO   THE   GOSPEL   OF   CHRIST 239

xvi.    SYNAGOGUES  :    THEIR    ORIGIN,    STRUCTURE,    AND     OUTWARD

ARRANGEMENTS 249

xvii.    THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  SYNAGOGUE 265

xviii.     OUTLINE  OF  ANCIENT  JEWISH  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE       .  281
APPENDIX  I. — TRANSLATION  OF  THE  MISHNIC  TRACTATE  "MIDDOTH"  297

APPENDIX  II.— TRANSLATION    OF    SELECTIONS     FROM    THE    BABYLON

TALMUD,  TRACTATE  "BERACHOTH"  .        .  309


SKETCHES  OF  JEWISH  LIFE,

31  n  3|llu0tratton  of  tlje  i]2rtx>  <<£e0tatmm;,
CHAPTER     I.

PALESTINE  EIGHTEEN   CENTURIES  AGO.

TI^IGHTEEN  and  a  half  centuries  ago,  and  the  land
JLl/  which  now  lies  desolate — its  bare,  grey  hills  looking
into  ill-tilled  or  neglected  valleys,  its  timber  cut  down,  its
olive-  and  vine-clad  terraces  crumbled  into  dust,  its  villages
stricken  with  poverty  and  squalor,  its  thoroughfares  insecure
and  deserted,  its  native  population  well-nigh  gone,  and  with
them  its  industry,  wealth,  and  strength — presented  a  scene
of  beauty,  richness,  and  busy  life  almost  unsurpassed  in
the  then  known  world.  The  Rabbis  never  weary  of  its
praises,  whether  their  theme  be  the  physical  or  the  moral
pre-eminence  of  Palestine.  It  happened,  so  writes  one  of
the  oldest  Hebrew  commentaries,1  that  Rabbi  Jonathan
was  sitting  under  a  fig-tree,  surrounded  by  his  students.
Of  a  sudden  he  noticed  how  the  ripe  fruit  overhead,  burst-
ing for  richness,  dropped  its  luscious  juice  on  the  ground,
while  at  a  little  distance  the  distended  udder  of  a  she-goat

l  See  Hamburger,  Real-Enr.  d.  Judcnth.  i.  p.  816,  note  37.

B


2  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

was  no  longer  able  to  hold  the  milk.  "  Behold,"  exclaimed
the  Rabbi,  as  the  two  streams  mingled,  "  the  literal  fulfilment
of  the  promise :  '  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey.' "
"  The  land  of  Israel  is  not  lacking  in  any  product  whatever/'
argued  Rabbi  Meir,  "  as  it  is  written  (Deut.  viii.  9) :  '  Thou
shalt  not  lack  anything  in  it.' "  l  Nor  were  such  statements
unwarranted  ;  for  Palestine  combined  every  variety  of  climate,
from  the  snows  of  Hermon  and  the  cool  of  Lebanon  to  the
genial  warmth  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee  and  the  tropical  heat  of
the  Jordan  valley.  Accordingly  not  only  the  fruit  trees,  the
grain,  and  garden  produce  known  in  our  colder  latitudes  were
found  in  the  land,  along  with  those  of  sunnier  climes,  but  also
the  rare  spices  and  perfumes  of  the  hottest  zones.  Similarly,
it  is  said,  every  kind  of  fish  teemed  in  its  waters,  while  birds
of  most  gorgeous  plumage  filled  the  air  with  their  song.2
Within  such  small  compass  the  country  must  have  been
unequalled  for  charm  and  variety.  On  the  eastern  side  of
Jordan  stretched  wide  plains,  upland  valleys,  park-like  forests,
and  almost  boundless  corn  and  pasture  lands  ;  on  the  western
side  were  terraced  hills,  covered  with  olives  and  vines,
delicious  glens,  in  which  sweet  springs  murmured,  and  fairy-
like  beauty  and  busy  life,  as  around  the  Lake  of  Galilee.
In  the  distance  stretched  the  wide  sea,  dotted  with  spreading
sails ;  here  was  luxurious  richness,  as  in  the  ancient  posses-
sions of  Issachar,  Manasseh,  and  Ephraim  ;  and  there,  beyond
these  plains  and  valleys,  the  highland  scenery  of  Judah,
shelving  down  through  the  pasture  tracts  of  the  Negev,  or

1  In  discussing  the  lawfulness  of  a  peppercorn  on  the  Day   of  Atonement.
Yomat  91  b,  towards  the  end.

2  Detailed  references  are  here,  of  course,  impossible  ;  but  compare,  for  example,
the  accounts  of  so  careful  and  able  a  naturalist  as  Canon  Tristram.


Palestine  Eighteen  Centuries  Ago.  3

South  country,  into  the  great  and  terrible  wilderness.  And
over  all,  so  long  as  God's  blessing  lasted,  were  peace  and
plenty.  Far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  browsed  "  the  cattle  on
a  thousand  hills  ; "  the  pastures  were  "  clothed  with  flocks,  the
valleys  also  covered  over  with  corn  ; "  and  the  land,  "  greatly
enriched  with  the  river  of  God,"  seemed  to  "  shout  for  joy,"
and  "  also  to  sing."  Such  a  possession,  heaven-given  at  the
first  and  heaven-guarded  throughout,  might  well  kindle  the
deepest  enthusiasm.

"We  find,"  writes  one  of  the  most  learned  Rabbinical
commentators,  supporting  each  assertion  by  a  reference  to
Scripture,1  "  that  thirteen  things  are  in  the  sole  ownership  of
the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  His  Name  !  and  these  are  they :  the
silver,  the  gold,  the  priesthood,  Israel,  the  first-born,  the  altar,
the  first-fruits,  the  anointing  oil,  the  tabernacle  ,of  meeting,
the  kingship  of  the  house  of  David,  the  sacrifices,  the  land  of
Israel,  and  the  eldership."  In  truth,  fair  as  the  land  was,  its
conjunction  with  higher  spiritual  blessings  gave  it  its  real  and*
highest  value.  "  Only  in  Palestine  does  the  Shechinah  mani-
fest itself,"  taught  the  Rabbis.  Outside  its  sacred  boundaries
no  such  revelation  was  possible.2  It  was  there  that  rapt
prophets  had  seen  their  visions,  and  psalmists  caught  strains
of  heavenly  hymns.  Palestine  was  the  land  that  had  Jeru-
salem for  its  capital,  and  on  its  highest  hill  that  temple  of
snowy  marble  and  glittering  gold  for  a  sanctuary,  around
which  clustered  such  precious  memories,  hallowed  thoughts,
and  glorious,  wide-reaching  hopes.  There  is  no  religion  so

1  R.  Bechai.     The  Scripture  references  are  :  Hagg.  ii.  8 ;  Ex.  xxix.  I  ;  Numb,
iii.  13 ;  Lev.    xxv.   55  ;  Ex.  xx.   24 ;  Ex.    xxv.  2  ;  Ex.    xxx.   31 ;  Ex.    xxv.  8 ;
Numb,  xxviii.  2 ;  I  Sam.  xvi.  I  ;  Lev.  xxv.  23.     Comp.  Relandi,  Palast.  (ed.
1716),  p.  14.

2  See,  for  example,  the  discussion  in  Mechilta  on  Ex.  xii.  J-


4  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

strictly  local  as  that  of  Israel.  Heathenism  was  indeed  the
worship  of  national  deities,  and  Judaism  that  of  Jehovah,  the
God  of  heaven  and  earth.  But  the  national  deities  of  the
heathen  might  be  transported,  and  their  rites  adapted  to
foreign  manners.  On  the  other  hand,  while  Christianity  was
from  the  first  universal  in  its  character  and  design,  the
religious  institutions  and  the  worship  of  the  Pentateuch,  and
even  the  prospects  opened  by  the  prophets  were,  so  far  as
they  concerned  Israel,  strictly  of  Palestine  and  for  Palestine.
The>  are  wholly  incompatible  with  the  permanent  loss  of
the  land.  An  extra-Palestinian  Judaism,  without  priesthood,
altar,  temple,  sacrifices,  tithes,  first-fruits,  Sabbatical  and
Jubilee  years,  must  first  set  aside  the  Pentateuch,  unless,  as  in
Christianity,  all  these  be  regarded  as  blossoms  designed  to
ripen  into  fruit,  as  types  pointing  to,  and  fulfilled  in  higher
realities.1  Outside  the  land  even  the  people  are  no  longer
Israel :  in  view  of  the  Gentiles  they  are  Jews  ;  in  their  own
view,  "  the  dispersed  abroad."

All  this  the  Rabbis  cou  d  not  fail  to  perceive.  Accordingly
when,  immediately  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by
Titus,  they  set  themselves  to  reconstruct  their  broken  com-

i  This  is  not  the  place  to  explain  what  substitution  Rabbinism  proposed  for
sacrifices,  etc.  I  am  well  aware  that  modern  Judaism  tries  to  prove  by  such
passages  as  I  Sam.  xv.  22  ;  Ps.  li.  16,  17  ;  Isa.  i.  11-13  >  Hos.  vi.  6,  that,  in  the
view  of  the  prophets,  sacrifices,  and  with  them  all  the  ritual  institutions  of  the
Pentateuch,  were  of  no  permanent  importance.  To  the  unprejudiced  reader  it
seems  difficult  to  understand  how  even  party-spirit  could  draw  such  sweeping  con-
clusions from  such  premisses,  or  how  it  could  ever  be  imagined  that  the  prophets
had  intended  by  their  teaching,  not  to  explain  or  apply,  but  to  set  aside  the  law
so  solemnly  given  on  Sinai.  However,  the  device  is  not  new.  A  solitary
voice  ventured  even  in  the  second  century  on  the  suggestion  that  the  sacrificial
worship  had  been  intended  only  by  way  of  accommodation,  to  preserve  Israel  from
lapsing  into  heathen  rites  1


Palestine  Eighteen  Centuries  Ago.  5

monwealth,  it  was  on  a  new  basis  indeed,  but  still  within
Palestine.  Palestine  was  the  Mount  Sinai  of  Rabbinism.
Here  rose  the  spring  of  the  Halachak,  or  traditional  law,
whence  it  flowed  in  ever-widening  streams  ;  here,  for  the  first
centuries,  the  learning,  the  influence,  and  the  rule  of  Judaism
centred  ;  and  there  they  would  fain  have  perpetuated  it.  The
first  attempts  at  rivalry  by  the  Babylonian  schools  of  Jewish
learning  were  keenly  resented  and  sharply  put  down.1  Only
the  force  of  circumstances  drove  the  Rabbis  afterwards  volun-
tarily to  seek  safety  and  freedom  in  the  ancient  seats  of  their
captivity,  where,  politically  unmolested,  they  could  give  the
final  development  to  their  system.  It  was  this  desire  to  pre-
serve the  nation  and  its  learning  in  Palestine  which  inspired
such  sentiments  as  we  are  about  to  quote.  "  The  very  air  of
Palestine  makes  one  wise,"  said  the  Rabbis.  The  Scriptural
account  of  the  borderland  of  Paradise,  watered  by  the  river
Havilah,  of  which  it  is  said  that  "the  gold  of  that  land  is
good,"  was  applied  to  their  earthly  Eden,  and  paraphrased
to  mean,  "  there  is  no  learning  like  that  of  Palestine."  It  was
a  saying,  that  "  to  live  in  Palestine  was  equal  to  the  obser-
vance of  all  the  commandments."  "  He  that  hath  his  perma-
nent abode  in  Palestine,"  so  taught  the  Talmud,  "is  sure
of  the  life  to  come."  "  Three  things,"  we  read  in  another
authority,  "  are  Israel's  through  suffering :  Palestine,  tradi-
tional lore,  and  the  world  to  come."  Nor  did  this  feeling
abate  with  the  desolation  of  their  country.  In  the  third  and
fourth  centuries  of  our  era  they  still  taught,  "  He  that  dwelleth
in  Palestine  is  without  sin."

Centuries  of  wandering  and  of  changes  have  not  torn  the
passionate  love  of  this  land  from  the  heart  of  the  people.

1  See  my  History  of  the  Jewish  Nation,  pp.  247,  248.


6  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Even  superstition  becomes  here  pathetic.  If  the  Talmud l  had
already  expressed  the  principle,  "  Whoever  is  buried  in  the
land  of  Israel,  is  as  if  he  were  buried  under  the  altar,"  one  of
the  most  ancient  Hebrew  commentaries 2  goes  much  farther.
From  the  injunction  of  Jacob  and  Joseph,  and  the  desire  of
the  fathers  to  be  buried  within  the  sacred  soil,  it  is  argued
that  those  who  lay  there  were  to  be  the  first  "  to  walk  before
the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living"  (Ps.  cxvi.  9),  the  first  to  rise
from  the  dead  and  to  enjoy  the  days  of  the  Messiah.  Not
to  deprive  of  their  reward  the  pious,  who  had  not  the  privilege
of  residing  in  Palestine,  it  was  added,  that  God  would  make
subterranean  roads  and  passages  into  the  Holy  Land,  and
that,  when  their  dust  reached  it,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  would
raise  them  to  new  life,  as  it  is  written  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  12-14) :
"  O  My  people,  I  will  open  your  graves,  and  cause  you  to
come  up  out  of  your  graves,  and  bring  you  into  the  land  of
Israel  ....  and  shall  put  My  Spirit  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live  ;
and  I  shall  place  you  in  your  own  land."  Almost  every
prayer  and  hymn  breathes  the  same  love  of  Palestine.  Indeed,
it  were  impossible,  by  any  extracts,  to  convey  the  pathos  of
some  of  those  elegies  in  which  the  Synagogue  still  bewails  the
loss  of  Zion,  or  expresses  the  pent-up  longing  for  its  resto-
ration.3 Desolate,  they  cling  to  its  ruins,  and  believe,  hope,
and  pray — oh,  how  ardently  !  in  almost  every  prayer — for  the
time  that  shall  come,  when  the  land,  like  Sarah  of  old,  will,  at
the  bidding  of  the  Lord,  have  youth,  beauty,  and  fruitfulness

1  Chelh.  iii.  a. — the  reference  here  being  most  curiously  to  Ex.  xx.  24:  "An
altar  of  earth  shalt  thou  make  to  Me."     Indeed,  that  whole  page  of  the  Talmud  is
very  characteristic  and  interesting.

2  Ber.  Rabba.

3  See  especially  the  sublimest  of  these  elegies,  that  by  Judah  ha-T.evi.


Palestine  Eighteen  Centuries  Ago.  7

restored,  and  in  Messiah  the  King  "  a  horn  of  salvation  shall
be  raised  up  " 1  to  the  house  of  David.

Yet  it  is  most  true,  as  noticed  by  a  recent  writer,  that  no
place  could  have  been  more  completely  swept  of  relics  than  is
Palestine.  Where  the  most  solemn  transactions  have  taken
place ;  where,  if  we  only  knew  it,  every  footstep  might  be
consecrated,  and  rocks,  and  caves,  and  mountain-tops  be
devoted  to  the  holiest  remembrances — we  are  almost  in  abso-
lute ignorance  of  exact  localities.  In  Jerusalem  itself  even
the  features  of  the  soil,  the  valleys,  depressions,  and  hills
have  changed,  or  at  least  lie  buried  deep  under  the  accumu-
lated ruins  of  centuries.  It  almost  seems  as  if  the  Lor<k
meant  to  do  with  the  land  what  Hezekiah  had  done  with  that
relic  of  Moses — the  brazen  serpent — when  he  stamped  it  to
pieces,  lest  its  sacred  memories  should  convert  it  into  an
occasion  for  idolatry.  The  lie  of  land  and  water,  of  mountain
and  valley,  are  the  same ;  Hebron,  Bethlehem,  the  Mount  of
Olives,  Nazareth,  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret,  *-he  land  of  Galilee,
are  still  there,  but  all  changed  in  form  and  appearance,  and
with  no  definite  spot  to  which  one  could  with  absolute
certainty  attach  the  most  sacred  events.  Events,  then,  not
places  ;  spiritual  realities,  not  their  outward  surroundings,
have  been  given  to  mankind  by  the  land  of  Palestine.

"  So  long  as  Israel  inhabited  Palestine,"  says  the  Babylonian
Talmud,  "  the  country  was  wide ;  but  now  it  has  become
narrow."  There  is  only  too  much  historical  truth  underlying
this  somewhat  curiously-worded  statement.  Each  successive
change  left  the  boundaries  of  the  Holy  Land  narrowed.

1  These  are  words  of  prayer  taken  from  one  of  the  most  ancient  fragments  of
the  Jewish  liturgy,  and  repeated,  probably  for  two  thousand  years,  every  day  by
every  Jew.


8  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Never  as  yet  has  it  actually  reached  the  extent  indicated  in
the  original  promise  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  18),  and  afterwards
confirmed  to  the  children  of  Israel  (Ex.  xxiii.  31).  The
nearest  approach  to  it  was  during  the  reign  of  King  David,
when  the  power  of  Judah  extended  as  far  as  the  river
Euphrates  (2  Sam.  viii.  3-14).  At  present  the  country  to
which  the  name  Palestine  attaches  is  smaller  than  at  any
previous  period.  As  of  old,  it  still  stretches  north  and  south
"from  Dan  to  Beersheba  ;"  in  the  east  and  west  from  Salcah
(the  modern  Sulkhad)  to  "  the  great  sea,"  the  Mediterranean.
Its  superficial  area  is  about  12,000  square  miles,  its  length
from  140  to  1 80,  its  breadth  in  the  south  about  75,  and  in
the  north  from  IOO  to  120  miles.  To  put  it  more  pictorially,
the  modern  Palestine  is  about  twice  as  large  as  Wales ;  it  is
smaller  than  Holland,  and  about  equal  in  size  to  Belgium.
Moreover, .  from  the  highest  mountain-peaks  a  glimpse  of
almost  the  whole  country  may  be  obtained.  So  small  was
the  land  which  the  Lord  chose  as  the  scene  of  the  most
marvellous  events  that  ever  happened  on  earth,  and  whence
He  appointed  light  and  life  to  flow  forth  into  all  the  world !

When  our  blessed  Saviour  trod  the  soil  of  Palestine,  the
country  had  already  undergone  many  changes.  The  ancient
division  of  tribes  had  given  way  ;  the  two  kingdoms  of  Judah
and  Israel  existed  no  longer ;  and  the  varied  foreign  domina-
tion, and  the  brief  period  of  absolute  national  independence,
had  alike  ceased.  Yet,  with  the  characteristic  tenacity  of  the
East  for  the  past,  the  names  of  the  ancient  tribes  still  attached
to  some  of  the  districts  formerly  occupied  by  them  (comp.
Matt.  iv.  13,  15).  A  comparatively  small  number  of  the
exiles  had  returned  to  Palestine  with  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,
and  the  Jewish  inhabitants  of  the  country  consisted  either  of


Palestine  Eighteen  Centuries  Ago.  9

those  who  had  originally  been  left  in  the  land,  or  of  the  tribes
of  Judah  and  Benjamin.  The  controversy  about  the  ten
tribes,  which  engages  so  much  attention  in  our  days,  raged
even  at  the  time  of  our  Lord.1  "  Will  He  go  unto  the  dis-
persed among  the  Gentiles  ? "  asked  the  Jews,  when  unable  to
fathom  the  meaning  of  Christ's  prediction  of  His  departure,
using  that  mysterious  vagueness  of  language  in  which  we
generally  clothe  things  which  we  pretend  to,  but  really  do  not
know.  "  The  ten  tribes  are  beyond  the  Euphrates  till  now,
and  are  an  immense  multitude,  and  not  to  be  estimated  by
numbers,"  writes  Josephus,  with  his  usual  grandiloquent  self-
complacency.  But  where — he  informs  us  as  little  as  any  of
his  other  contemporaries.  We  read  in  the  earliest  Jewish
authority,  the  Mishnah  (Sanh.  x.  3) :  "  The  ten  tribes  shall
never  return  again,  as  it  is  written  (Deut.  xxix.  28),  '  And  He
cast  them  into  another  land,  as  this  day.'  As  'this  day'
goeth  and  does  not  return  again,  so  they  also  go  and  do  not
return.  This  is  the  view  of  Rabbi  Akiba.  Rabbi  Elieser
says,  '  As  the  day  becomes  dark  and  has  light  again,  so  the
ten  tribes,  to  whom  darkness  has  come  ;  but  light  shall  also  be
restored  to  them.' "

i  This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  the  question.  There  can  be  no  reasonable
doubt,  that  colonies  from  some  of  tHese  tribes  are  scattered  far  and  wide.  Thus
descendants  of  them  are  traced  in  the  Crimea,  where  the  dates  on  their  grave-
stones are  reckoned  from  "  the  era  of  the  exile,  in  696  B.C.  ;  i.e.,  the  exile  of  the
ten  tribes  ;  not  586  B.C.,  when  Jerusalem  was  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar  "  (Dr.  S.
Davidson,  in  Kitto's  Cycl.  of  Bibl.  Lit.  iii.  p.  1173).  For  notices  of  the  wander-
ings of  the  ten  tribes  see  my  Hist,  of  the  Jewish  Nation,  pp.  61-63  ;  also  the  late
Dr.  Wolffs  researches  in  his  journeys.  How  prone  even  learned  Talmudical  Jew*
are  to  credulity  in  the  matter  of  the  ten  tribes  may  be  gathered  from  the  Appendix
to  Rabbi  Schwartz's  (of  Jerusalem)  Holy  Land  (pp.  407-422  of  the  German  ed.).
The  oldest  Hebrew  Crimean  inscriptions  date  from  the  years  6,  30,  and  89  of  our
era  (Chwolson,  Mem.  d' V Ac.  de  St.  Petersb.  ix.  1866,  No.  7).


lo  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

At  the  time  of  Christ's  birth  Palestine  was  governed  by
Herod  the  Great ;  that  is,  it  was  nominally  an  independent
kingdom,  but  under  the  suzerainty  of  Rome.  On  the  death
of  Herod — that  is,  very  close  upon  the  opening  of  the  gospel
story  —  a  fresh,  though  only  temporary,  division  of  his
dominions  took  place.  The  events  connected  with  it  fully
illustrate  the  parable  of  our  Lord,  recorded  in  Luke  xix.  12-
15,  27.  If  they  do  not  form  its  historical  groundwork,  they
were  at  least  so  fresh  in  the  memory  of  Christ's  hearers,  that
their  minds  must  have  involuntarily  reverted  to  them.  Herod
died,  as  he  had  lived,  cruel  and  treacherous.  A  few  days
before  his  end,  he  had  once  more  altered  his  will,  and  nomi-
nated Archelaus  his  successor  in  the  kingdom  ;  Herod  Antipas
(the  Herod  of  the  gospels),  tetrarch  of  Galilee  and  Peraea ;
and  Philip,  tetrarch  of  Gaulonitis,  Trachonitis,  Batanaea,  and
Panias — districts  to  which,  in  the  sequel,  we  may  have  further
to  refer.  As  soon  after  the  death  of  Herod  as  circum-
stances would  permit,  and  when  he  had  quelled  a  rising  in
Jerusalem,  Archelaus  hastened  to  Rome  to  obtain  the
emperor's  confirmation  of  his  father's  will.  He  was  imme-
diately followed  by  his  brother  Herod  Antipas,  who  in  a
previous  testament  of  Herod  had  been  left  what  Archelaus
now  claimed.  Nor  were  the  two  alone  in  Rome.  They
found  there  already  a  number  of  members  of  Herod's  family,
each  clamorous  for  something,  but  all  agreed  that  they  would
rather  have  none  of  their  own  kindred  as  king,  and  that  the
country  should  be  put  under  Roman  sway  ;  if  otherwise,  they
anyhow  preferred  Herod  Antipas  to  Archelaus.  Each  of  the
brothers  had,  of  course,  his  own  party,  intriguing,  manoeuvring,
and  trying  to  influence  the  emperor.  Augustus  inclined  from
the  first  to  Archelaus.  The  formal  decision,  however,  was  for


Palestine  Eighteen  Centuries  Ago.  1 1

a  time  postponed  by  a  fresh  insurrection  in  Judaea,  which  was
quelled  only  with  difficulty.  Meanwhile,  a  Jewish  deputation
appeared  in  Rome,  entreating  that  none  of  the  Herodians
might  ever  be  appointed  king,  on  the  ground  of  their  infamous
deeds,  which  they  related,  and  that  they  (the  Jews)  might  be
allowed  to  live  according  to  their  own  laws,  under  the  suze-
rainty of  Rome.  Augustus  ultimately  decided  to  carry  out
the  will  of  Herod  the  Great,  but  gave  Archelaus  the  title  of
ethnarch  instead  of  king,  promising  him  the  higher  grade  if
he  proved  deserving  of  it  (Matt.  ii.  22).  On  his  return  to
Judaea,  Archelaus  (according  to  the  story  in  the  parable)  took
bloody  vengeance  on  "  his  citizens  that  hated  him,  and  sent
a  message  after  him,  saying,  We  will  not  have  this  man  to
reign  over  us."  The  reign  of  Archelaus  did  not  last  long.
Fresh  and  stronger  complaints  came  from  Judaea.  Archelaus
was  deposed,  and  Judaea  joined  to  the  Roman  province  of
Syria,  but  with  a  procurator  of  its  own.  The  revenues  of
Archelaus,  so  long  as  he  reigned,  amounted  to  very  consider-
ably over  £240,000  a  year  ;  those  of  his  brothers  respectively
to  a  third  and  sixth  of  that  sum.  But  this  was  as  nothing
compared  to  the  income  of  Herod  the  Great,  which  stood
at  the  enormous  sum  of  about  £680,000 ;  and  that  afterwards
of  Agrippa  II.,  which  is  computed  as  high  as  half  a  million.
In  thinking  of  these  figures,  it  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind
the  general  cheapness  of  living  in  Palestine  at  the  time,  which
may  be  gathered  from  the  smallness  of  the  coins  in  circulation,
and  from  the  lowness  of  the  labour  market.  The  smallest
coin,  a  (Jewish)  perutah,  amounted  to  only  the  sixteenth  of  a
penny.  Again,  readers  of  the  New  Testament  will  remember
that  a  labourer  was  wont  to  receive  for  a  day's  work  in  field
or  vineyard  a  denarius  (Matt.  xx.  2),  or  about  8d.,  while  the


12  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Good  Samaritan  paid  for  the  charge  of  the  sick  person  whom
he  left  in  the  inn  only  two  denars,  or  about  is.  4d.  (Luke  x.  35).

But  we  are  anticipating.  Our  main  object  was  to  explain
the  division  of  Palestine  in  the  time  of  our  Lord.  Politically
speaking,  it  consisted  of  Judaea  and  Samaria,  under  Roman
procurators  ;  Galilee  and  Peraea  (on  the  other  side  Jordan),
subject  to  Herod  Antipas,  the  murderer  of  John  the  Baptist —
"  that  fox  "  full  of  cunning  and  cruelty,  to  whom  the  Lord,
when  sent  by  Pilate,  would  give  no  answer;  and  Batanaea,
Trachonitis,  and  Auranitis,  under  the  rule  of  the  tetrarch
Philip.  It  would  require  too  many  details  to  describe
accurately  those  latter  provinces.  Suffice,  that  they  lay
quite  to  the  north-east,  and  that  one  of  their  principal  cities
was  Caesarea  Philippi  (called  after  the  Roman  emperor,  and
after  Philip  himself),  where  Peter  made  that  noble  confession,
which  constituted  the  rock  on  which  the  Church  was  to  be
built  (Matt.  xvi.  16;  Mark  viii.  29).  It  was  the  wife  of  this
Philip,  the  best  of  all  Herod's  sons,  whom  her  brother-in-law,
Herod  Antipas,  induced  to  leave  her  husband,  and  for  whose
sake  he  beheaded  John  (Matt.  xiv.  3,  etc. ;  Mark  vi.  17  ;
Luke  iii.  19).  It  is  well  to  know  that  this  adulterous  and
incestuous  union  brought  Herod  immediate  trouble  and
misery,  and  that  it  ultimately  cost  him  his  kingdom,  and
sent  Him  into  life-long  banishment.

Such  was  the  political  division  of  Palestine.  Commonly  it
was  arranged  into  Galilee,  Samaria,  Judaea,  and  Peraea.  It  is
scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  the  Jews  did  not  regard
Samaria  as  belonging  to  the  Holy  Land,  but  as  a  strip  of
foreign  country — as  the  Talmud  designates  it  (Chag.  25  a.),
"  a  Cuthite  strip,"  or  "  tongue,"  intervening  between  Galilee
and  Judaea.  From  the  gospels  we  know  that  the  Samaritans


Palestine  Eighteen  Centuries  Ago.  13

were  not  only  ranked  with  Gentiles  and  strangers  (Matt.  x.  5 ;
John  iv.  9,  20),  but  that  the  very  term  Samaritan  was  one  of
reproach  (John  viii.  48).  "  There  be  two  manner  of  nations,"
says  the  son  of  Sirach  (Ecclus.  1.  25,  26),  "which  my  heart
abhorreth,  and  the  third  is  no  nation  ;  they  that  sit  upon  the
mountain  of  Samaria,  and  they  that  dwell  among  the  Philis-
tines, and  that  foolish  people  that  dwell  in  Sichem."  And
Josephus  has  a  story  to  account  for  the  exclusion  of  the
Samaritans  from  the  Temple,  to  the  effect  that  in  the  night
of  the  Passover,  when  it  was  the  custom  to  open  the  Temple
gates  at  midnight,  a  Samaritan  had  come  and  strewn
bones  in  the  porches  and  throughout  the  Temple  to  defile
the  Holy  House.  Most  unlikely  as  this  appears,  at  least
in  its  details,  it  shows  the  feeling  of  the  people.  On  the
other  hand,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  Samaritans  fully
retaliated  by  bitter  hatred  and  contempt.  For,  at  every
period  of  sore  national  trial,  the  Jews  had  no  more  deter-
mined or  relentless  enemies  than  those  who  claimed  to
be  the  only  true  representatives  of  Israel's  worship  and
hopes.


CHAPTER     II.

*JEWS   AND  GENTILES   IN   "THE  LAND."

COMING  down  from  Syria,  it  would  have  been  difficult  to
fix  the  exact  spot  where,  in  the  view  of  the  Rabbis,
"the  land"  itself  began.  The  boundary  lines,  though  men-
tioned in  four  different  documents,  are  not  marked  in  any-
thing like  geographical  order,  but  as  ritual  questions  connected
with  them  came  up  for  theological  discussion.1  For,  to  the
Rabbis  the  precise  limits  of  Palestine  were  chiefly  interesting
so  far  as  they  affected  the  religious  obligations  or  privileges
of  a  district.  And  in  this  respect  the  fact  that  a  city  was  in
heathen  possession  exercised  a  decisive  influence.  Thus  the
environs  of  Ascalon,  the  wall  of  Caesarea,  and  that  of  Acco,
were  reckoned  within  the  boundaries  of  Palestine,  though  the
cities  themselves  were  not.  Indeed,  viewing  the  question  from
this  point,  Palestine  was  to  the  Rabbis  simply  "the  land,"2
all  other  countries  being  summed  up  under  the  designation
of  "  outside  the  land."  In  the  Talmud,  even  the  expression
"  Holy  Land,"  so  common  among  later  Jews  and  Christians,3

1  Rappoport,  Er.  Mill.  p.  208,  in  Neubauer's  Geogr.  du  Talmud,  p.  IQ.

2  So  mostly  ;  the  expression  also  occurs  "  the  land  of  Israel."

*  The  only  passage  of  Scripture  in  which  the  term  is  used  is  Zech.  ii.  12,  or
rather  ii.  16  of  the  Hebrew  original.


Jews  and  Gentues  in  "the  Land?  15

does  not  once  occur.  It  needed  not  that  addition,  which
might  have  suggested  a  comparison  with  other  countries ;  for
to  the  Rabbinist  Palestine  was  not  only  holy,  but  the  only
holy  ground,  to  the  utter  exclusion  of  all  other  countries,
although  they  marked  within  its  boundaries  an  ascending
scale  of  ten  degrees  of  sanctity,  rising  from  the  bare  soil  of
Palestine  to  the  most  holy  place  in  the  Temple  (CJieL  i.  6-9).
But  "  outside  the  land  "  everything  was  darkness  and  death.
The  very  dust  of  a  heathen  country  was  unclean,  and  it
defiled  by  contact.1  It  was  regarded  like  a  grave,  or  like  the
putrescence  of  death.  If  a  spot  of  heathen  dust  had  touched
an  offering,  it  must  at  once  be  burnt.  More  than  that,  ir  Dy
mischance  any  heathen  dust  had  been  brought  into  Palestine,
it  did  not  and  could  not  mingle  with  that  of  "  the  land,"  but
remained  to  the  end  what  it  had  been — unclean,  defiled,  and
defiling  everything  to  which  it  adhered.  This  will  cast  light
upon  the  meaning  conveyed  by  the  symbolical  directions
of  our  Lord  to  His  disciples  (Matt.  x.  14),  when  He  sent
them  forth  to  mark  out  the  boundary  lines  of  the  true  Israel
— "  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  that  was  at  hand  :  "  Whoso-
ever shall  not  receive  you,  nor  hear  your  words,  when  ye
depart  out  of  that  house  or  city,  shake  off  the  dust  of  your
feet."  In  other  words,  they  were  not  only  to  leave  such  a
city  or  household,  but  it  was  to  be  considered  and  treated
as  if  it  were  heathen,  just  as  in  the  similar  case  mentioned
in  Matt,  xviii.  17.  All  contact  with  such  must  be  avoided,
all  trace  of  it  shaken  off,  and  that,  even  though,  like  some
of  the  cities  in  Palestine  that  were  considered  heathen,  they
were  surrounded  on  every  side  by  what  was  reckoned  as
belonging  to  Israel.

1  The  references  here  are  too  numerous  lor  special  mention.


1 6  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

The  Mishnah1  marks,  in  reference  to  certain  ordinances,
'*  three  lands  "  which  might  equally  be  designated  as  Palestine,
but  to  which  different  ritual  regulations  applied.  The  first
comprised,  "  all  which  they  who  came  up  from  Babylon  took
possession  of  in  the  land  of  Israel  and  unto  Chezib"  (about
three  hours  north  of  Acre) ;  the  second,  "  all  that  they  who
came  up  from  Egypt  took  possession  of  from  Chezib  and
unto  the  river  (Euphrates)  eastward,  and  unto  Amanah "
(supposed  to  be  a  mountain  near  Antioch,  in  Syria) ;  while
the  third,  seemingly  indicating  certain  ideal  outlines,  was
probably  intended  to  mark  what  "  the  land "  would  have
been,  according  to  the  original  promise  of  God,  although
it  was  never  possessed  to  that  extent  by  Israel.2  For  our
present  purpose,  of  "course,  only  the  first  of  these  defini-
tions must  be  applied  to  "  the  land."  We  read  in  Menachoth
vii.  i  :  "  Every  offering,3  whether  of  the  congregation  or
of  an  individual  (public  or  private),  may  come  from  'the
land,'  or  from  'outside  the  land,  be  of  the  new  product
(of  the  year)  or  of  old  product,  except  the  omer  (the  wave-
sheaf  at  the  Passover)  and  the  two  loaves  (at  Pentecost),
which  may  only  be  brought  from  new  product  (that  of  the
current  year),  and  from  that  (which  grows)  within  '  the  land.' "

1  Shev.  vi.  I  ;  Chall.  iv.  8.

2  The  expressions  in  the  original  are  so  obscure  as  to  render  it  difficult  to  form
a  quite  definite  judgment.     In  the  text  we  have  followed  the  views  expressed  by
M.  Neubauer.

3  Neither  of  the  English  words  :  "sacrifice,"  "offering,"  or  "gift"  quite  cor-
responds to  the  Hebrew  Korban,  derived  from  a  verb  which  in  one  mood  means  to
be  near,  and  in  another  to  bring  near.     In  the  one  case  it  would  refer  to  the
offerings  themselves,  in  the  other  to  the  offerers,  as  brought  near,  the  offerings
t/iinging  them  near  to  God.     The  latter  seems  to  me  both  etymological ly  and
theologically  the  right  explanation.     Aberbanel  combines  both  in  his  definition  of
Korban.


and  Gentiles  in  "the  Land"  17

To  these  two,  the  Mishnah  adds  in  another  passage
(Chel.  i.  6)  also  the  Biccurim,  or  first-fruits  in  their  fresh  state,
although  inaccurately,  since  the  latter  were  likewise  brought
from  what  is  called  by  the  Rabbis  Syria,1  which  seems  to  have
been  regarded  as,  in  a  sense,  intermediate  between  "  the  land  '*
and  "  outside  the  land."  The  term  Soria,  or  Syria,  does,  not
include  that  country  alone,  but  all  the  lands  which,  according
to  the  Rabbis,  David  had  subdued,  such  as  Mesopotamia,
Syria,  Zobah,  Achlab,  etc.  It  would  be  too  lengthy  to  explain
in  detail  the  various  ordinances  in  regard'"  to  which  Soria
was  assimilated  to,  and  those  by  which  it  was  distinguished
from,  Palestine  proper.  The  preponderance  of  duty  and
privilege  was  certainly  in  favour  of  Syria,  so  much  so,  that  if
one  could  have  stepped  from  its  soil  straight  to  that  of
Palestine,  or  joined  fields  in  the  two  countries,  without  the
interposition  of  any  Gentile  strip,  the  land  and  the  dust  of
Syria  would  have  been  considered  clean,  like  that  of  Palestine
itself  (phol.  xviii.  7).  There  was  thus  around  "  the  land  "  a
sort  of  inner  band,  consisting  of  those  countries  supposed  to
have  been  annexed  by  King  David,  and  termed  Soria.  But
besides  this,  there  was  also  what  may  be  called  an  outer  band,
towards  the  Gentile  world,  consisting  of  Egypt,  Babylon,
Ammon  and  Moab,  the  countries  in  which  Israel  had  a
special  interest,  and  which  were  distinguished  from  the  rest,
"outside  the  land,"  by  this,  that  they  were  liable  to  tithes
and  the  Therumoth,  or  first-fruits  in  a  prepared  state.  Of
course  neither  of  these  contributions  was  actually  brought
into  Palestine,  but  either  employed  by  them  for  their  sacreci
purposes,  or  else  redeemed.

1  Syria  sent  Biccurim  to  Jerusalem,  but  was  not  liable  to  second  tithes,  nor  for
the  fourth  year's  product  of  plants  (Lev.  xix.  24).

C


itf  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Maimonides  arranges  all  countries  into  three  classes,  "  so
far  as  concerns  the  precepts  connected  with  the  soil " — "  the
land,  Soria,  and  outside  the  land ;"  and  he  divides  the  land  of
Israel  into  territory  possessed  before  and  after  the  Exile,
while  he  also  distinguishes  between  Egypt,  Babylon,  Moab
and  Ammon,  and  other  lands.1  In  popular  estimate  other
distinctions  were  likewise  made.  Thus  Rabbi  Jose  of  Galilee
would  have  it,2  that  Biccurim*  were  not  to  be  brought  from  the
other  side  of  Jordan,  "  because  it  was  not  a  land  flowing  with
milk  and  honey."  But  as  the  Rabbinical  law  in  this  respect
differed  from  the  view  expressed  by  Rabbi  Jose,  his  must  have
been  an  afterthought,  probably  intended  to  account  for  the
fact  that  they  beyond  Jordan  did  not  bring  their  first-fruits
to  the  Temple.  Another  distinction  claimed  for  the  country
west  of  the  Jordan  curiously  reminds  us  of  the  fears  ex-
pressed by  the  two  and  a  half  tribes  on  their  return  to  their
homes,  after  the  first  conquest  of  Palestine  under  Joshua
(Joshua  xxii.  24,  25),  since  it  declared  the  land  east  of  Jordan
less  sacred,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  the  Temple,  of  which
it  had  not  been  worthy.  Lastly,  Judaea  proper  claimed
pre-eminence  over  Galilee,  as  being  the  centre  of  Rabbinism.
Perhaps  it  may  be  well  here  to  state  that,  notwithstanding
strict  uniformity  on  all  principal  points,  Galilee  and  Judaea
had  each  its  own  peculiar  legal  customs  and  rights,  which
differed  in  many  particulars  one  from  the  other.

What  has  hitherto  been  explained  from  Rabbinical  writings
gains  fresh  interest  when  we  bring  it  to  bear  on  the  study  of

1  f filch.  Ther.  i.  6.  2  Bice.  i.  10.

3  For  a  full  explanation  of  the  distinction  between  Biccuritn  and  Thcrumoth  see
my  work  on  The  Temple:  its  Ministry  and  Services  as  they  were  at  the  Time  oj
Jesus  Chri>\,


Jews  and  Gentiles  in  "the  Land"  ig

the  New  Testament.  For,  we  can  now  understand  how  those
Zealots  from  Jerusalem,  who  would  have  bent  the  neck  of  the
Church  under  the  yoke  of  the  law  of  Moses,  Sought  out  in  pre-
ference the  flourishing  communities  in  Syriafor  the  basis  of  their
operations  (Acts  xv.  l).  There  Was  a  special  significance  in
this,  as  Syria  formed  a  kind  of  outer  Palestine,  holding  an
intermediate  position  between  it  and  heathen  lands.  Again,  it
results  from  our  inquiries,  that,  what  the  Rabbis  considered
as  the  land  of  Israel  proper,  may  be  regarded  as  commencing
immediately  south  of  Antioch.  Thus  the  city  where  the  first
Gentile  Church  was  formed  (A.cts  xi.  20,  21);  where  the
disciples  were  first  called  Christians  (Acts  xi.  26)  ;  where  Paul
so  long  exercised  his  ministry,  and  whence  he  started  on  his
missionary  journeys,  was,  significantly  enough,  just  outside
the  land  of  Israel.  Immediately  beyond  it  lay  the  country
over  which  the  Rabbis  claimed  entire  sway.  Travelling  south-
wards, the  first  district  which  one  would  reach  would  be  what  is
known  from  the  gospels  as  "  the  coasts  (or  tracts)  of  Tyre  and
Sidon."  St.  Mark  describes  the  district  more  particularly  (Mark
vii.  24)  as  "  the  borders  of  Tyre  and  Sidon."  These  stretched,
according  to  Josephus  (Jewish  Wars,  iii.  3,  i),  at  the  time  of
our  Lord,  from  the  Mediterranean  towards  Jordan.  It  was  to
these  extreme  boundary  tracts  of  "the  land,"  that  Jesus  had
withdrawn  from  the  Pharisees,  when  they  were  offended  a\.
His  opposition  to  their  "  blind"  traditionalism  ;  and  there  He
healed  by  the  word  of  His  power  the  daughter  of  the  "  woman
of  Canaan,"  the  intensity  of  whose  faith  drew  from  His  lips
words  of  precious  commendation  (Matt.  xv.  28  ;  Mark  vii.  29).
It  was  chiefly  a  heathen  district  where  the  Saviour  spoke  the
word  of  healing,  and  where  the  woman  would  not  let  the
Messiah  of  Israel  go  without  an  answer.  She  herself  was  r,


2O  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Gentile.  Indeed,  not  only  that  district,  but  all  around,  and
farther  on,  the  territory  of  Philip,  was  almost  entirely  heathen.
More  than  that,  strange  as  it  may  sound,  all  around  the  dis-
tricts inhabited  by  the  Jews  the  country  was,  so  to  speak,
fringed  by  foreign  nationalities  and  by  heathen  worship,
rites,  and  customs.

Properly  to  understand  the  history  of  the  time  and  the
circumstances  indicated  in  the  New  Testament,  a  correct  view
of  the  state  of  parties  in  this  respect  is  necessary.  And  here
we  must  guard  against  a  not  unnatural  mistake.  If  any  one  had
expected  to  find  within  the  boundaries  of  "  the  land  "  itself  one
nationality,  one  language,  the  same  interests,  or  even  one
religion  publicly  professed,  he  would  have  been  bitterly  dis-
appointed. It  was  not  merely  for  the  presence  of  the  Romans
and  their  followers,  and  of  a  more  or  less  influential  number  of
foreign  settlers,  but  the  Holy  Land  itself  was  a  country  of
mixed  and  hostile  races,  of  divided  interests,  where  close  by
the  side  of  the  narrowest  and  most  punctilious  Pharisaism
heathen  temples  rose,  and  heathen  rites  and  customs  openly
prevailed.  In  a  general  way  all  this  will  be  readily  under-
stood. For,  those  who  returned  from  Babylon  were  com-
paratively few  in  number,  and  confessedly  did  not  occupy  the
land  in  its  former  extent.  During  the  troubled  period  which
followed,  there  was  a  constant  influx  of  heathen,  and  unceasing
attempts  were  made  to  introduce  and  perpetuate  foreign
elements.  Even  the  language  of  Israel  had  undergone  a
change.  In  the  course  of  time  the  ancient  Hebrew  had  wholly
given  place  to  the  Aramaean  dialect,  except  in  public  worship
and  in  the  learned  academies  of  theological  doctors.  Such
words  and  names  in  the  gospels  as  Raka,  Abba,  Golgotha,
Gabbatha,  Akel-Dama,  Bartholomaios,  Barabbas,  Bar -Jesus,


Jews  and  Gentiles  in  "the  Land''  21

and  the  various  verbal  quotations,  are  all  Aramaean.  It  was
probably  in  that  language  that  Paul  addressed  the  infuriated
multitude,  when  standing  on  the  top  of  the  steps  leading  from
the  Temple  into  the  fortress  Antonia  (Acts  xxi.  40 ;  xxii.).
But  along  with  the  Hebraic  Aramaean — for  so  we  would
designate  the  language — the  Greek  had  for  some  time  been
making  its  way  among  the  people.  The  Mishnah  itself  con-
tains a  very  large  number  of  Greek  and  Latin  words  with
Hebraic  terminations,  showing  how  deeply  Gentile  life  and
customs  around  had  affected  even  those  who  hated  them
most,  and,  by  inference,  how  thoroughly  they  must  have
penetrated  Jewish  society  in  general.  But  besides,  it  had
been  long  the  policy  of  their  rulers  systematically  to  promote
all  that  was  Grecian  in  thought  and  feeling.  It.  needed  the
obstinate  determinateness,  if  not  the  bigotry,  of  Pharisaism  to
prevent  their  success,  and  this  may  perhaps  partly  explain
the  extreme  of  their  antagonism  against  all  that  was  Gentile.
A  brief  notice  of  the  religious  state  of  the  outlying  districts  of
the  country  may  place  this  in  a  clearer  light.

In  the  far  north-east  of  the  land,  occupying  at  least  in
part  the  ancient  possession  of  Manasseh,  were  the  provinces
belonging  to  the  tetrarch  Philip  (Luke  Hi.  i).  Many  spots  there
(Mark  viii.  22;  Luke  ix.  10;  Matt.  xvi.  13)  are  dear  to  the
Christian  memory.  After  the  Exile  these  districts  had  been
peopled  by  wild,  predatory  nomads,  like  the  Bedawin  of  our
days.  These  lived  chiefly  in  immense  caves,  where  they  stored
their  provisions,  and  in  case  of  attack  defended  themselves
and  their  flocks.  Herod  the  Great  and  his  successors  had
indeed  subdued,  and  settled  among  them,  a  large  number
of  Jewish  and  Idumaean  colonists — the  former  brought  from
Babylon,  under  the  leadership  of  one  Zamaris,  and  attracted,


22  Sketches  of  Jeiuish  Life.

like  the  modern  German  colonists  in  parts  of  Russia,  by
immunity  from  taxation.  But  the  vast  majority  of  the  people
were  still  Syrians  and  Grecians,  rude,  barbarous,  and  heathens.
Indeed,  there  the  worship  of  the  old  Syrian  gods  had  scarcely
given  way  to  the  more  refined  rites  of  Greece.  It  was  in  this
neighbourhood  that  Peter  made  that  noble  confession  of  faith,
on  which,  as  on  a  rock,  the  Church  is  built.  But  Caesarea
Philippi  was  originally  Paneas,  the  city  devoted  to  Pan ;  nor
does  its  change  of  name  indicate  a  more  Jewish  direction
on  the  part  of  its  inhabitants.  Indeed,  Herod  the  Great  had
built  there  a  temple  to  Augustus.  But  further  particulars
are  scarcely  necessary,  for  recent  researches  have  everywhere
brought  to  light  relics  of  the  worship  of  the  Phoenician  Astarte,
of  the  ancient  Syrian  god  of  the  sun,  and  even  of  the  Egyptian
Ammon,  side  by  side  with  that  of  the  well-known  Grecian
deities.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  refined  Damascus,
the  territory  of  which  formed  here  the  extreme  boundary  of
Palestine.  Passing  from  the  eastern  to  the  western  bounds
of  Palestine,  we  find  that  in  Tyre  and  Ptolemais  Phrygian,
Egyptian,  Phoenician,  and  Greek  rites  contended  for  the
mastery.  In  the  centre  of  Palestine,  notwithstanding  the
pretence  of  the  Samaritans  to  be  the  only  true  representatives
of  the  religion  of  Moses,  the  very  name  of  their  capital,
Sebaste,  for  Samaria,  showed  how  thoroughly  Grecianised
was  that  province.  Herod  had  built  in  Samaria  also  a
magnificent  temple  to  Augustus  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
that,  as  the  Greek  language,  so  Grecian  rites  and  idolatry
prevailed.  Another  outlying  district,  the  Dccapolis  (Matt.  iv.
25  ;  Mark  v.  20 ;  vii.  31),  was  almost  entirely  Grecian  in  con-
stitution, language,  and  worship.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  federation
of  ten  heathen  cities  within  the  territory  of  Israel,  possess-


yews  and  Gentiles  in  "the  Land"  23

ing  a  government  of  their  own.  Little  is  known  of  its  cha-
racter ;  indeed,  the  cities  themselves  are  not  always  equally
enumerated  by  different  writers.  We  name  those  of  most
importance  to  readers  of  the  New  Testament.  Scythopolis,  the
ancient  Beth-shean  (Josh.  xvii.  11,  16 ;  Judg.  i  27 ;  I  Sam.
xxxi.  10,  12,  etc.),  was  the  only  one  of  those  cities  situated
west  of  the  Jordan.  It  lay  about  four  hours  south  of  Tiberias.
Gadara,  the  capital  of  Peraea,  is  known  to  us  from  Matt.  viii.
28 ;  Mark  v.  I  ;  Luke  viii.  26.  Lastly,  we  mention  as
specially  interesting,  Pella,  the  place  to  which  the  Christians
of  Jerusalem  fled  in  obedience  to  the  warning  of  our  Lord
(Matt.  xxiv.  15-20),  to  escape  the  doom  of  the  city,
when  finally  beleaguered  by  the  Romans.  The  situation
of  Pella  has  not  been  satisfactorily  ascertained,  but
probably  it  lay  at  no  great  distance  from  the  ancient
Jabesh  Gilead. l

But  to  return.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  appear
that  there  remained  only  Galilee  and  Judaea  proper,  in  which
strictly  Jewish  views  and  manners  must  be  sought  for.  Each
of  these  will  be  described  in  detail.  For  the  present  it  will
suffice  to  remark,  that  north-eastern  or  Upper  Galilee  was  in
great  part  inhabited  by  Gentiles — Phoenicians,  Syrians,  Arabs,
and  Greeks,2  whence  the  name  "  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles "
(Matt.  iv.  15).  It  is  strange  in  how  many  even  of  those  cities,
with  which  we  are  familiar  from  the  New  Testament,  the
heathen  element  prevailed.  Tiberias,  which  gave  its  name  to
the  lake,  was  at  the  time  of  Christ  of  quite  recent  origin,
having  been  built  by  the  tetrarch  Herod  Antipas  (the
Herod  of  the  gospel  history),  and  named  in  honour  of  the

1  Compare  the  full  discussion  in  Caspari,  Chronol.  Geogr.  Einl.  in  d.  Lebe*
7.  C.  pp.  87-90.  »  Jos.  J.  W.  iii.  9,  3-


24  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Emperor  Tiberius.  Although  endowed  by  its  founder  with
many  privileges,  such  as  houses  and  lands  for  its  inhabitants,
and  freedom  from  taxation — the  latter  tying  continued  by
Vespasian  after  the  Jewish  war — Herod  had  to  colonise  it  by
main  force,  so  far  as  its  few  Jewish  inhabitants  were  concerned.
For,  the  site  on  which  the  city  stood  had  of  old  covered  a  place
of  burial,  and  the  whole  ground  was  therefore  levitically
unclean  (Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  2,  3).  However  celebrated,  therefore,
afterwards  as  the  great  and  final  seat  of  the  Jewish  Sanhedrim,
it  was  originally  chiefly  un-Jewish.  Gaza  had  its  local  deity  ;
Ascalon  worshipped  Astarte  ;  Joppa  was  the  locality  where,
at  the  time  when  Peter  had  his  vision  there,  they  still  showed
on  the  rocks  of  the  shore  the  marks  of  the  chains,  by  which
Andromeda  was  said  to  have  been  held,  when  Perseus  came
to  set  her  free.  Ccesarea  was  an  essentially  heathen  city,
though  inhabited  by  many  Jews  ;  and  one  of  its  most  con-
spicuous ornaments  was  another  temple  to  Augustus,  built
on  a  hill  opposite  the  entrance  to  the  harbour,  so  as  to  be
visible  far  out  at  sea.  But  what  could  be  expected,  when  in
Jerusalem  itself  Herod  had  reared  a  magnificent  theatre  and
amphitheatre,  to  which  gladiators  were  brought  from  all  parts
of  the  world,  and  where  games  were  held,  thoroughly  anti-
Jewish  and  heathen  in  their  spirit  and  tendency  ?  (Jos.  Ant.
xv.  8,  i).  The  favourites  and  counsellors  by  whom  that
monarch  surrounded  himself  were  heathens ;  wherever  he  or
his  successors  could,  they  reared  heathen  temples,  and  on  all
occasions  they  promoted  the  spread  of  Grecian  views.  Yet
withal  they  professed  to  be  Jews  ;  they  would  not  shock
Jewish  prejudices  ;  indeed,  as  the  building  of  the  Temple,  the
frequent  advocacy  at  Rome  of  the  cause  of  Jews  when  op-
pressed, and  many  other  facts  show,  the  Herodians  would


and  Gentiles  in  " the  Land"  25

fain  have  kept  on  good  terms  with  the  national  party,  or  rather
used  it  as  their  tool.  And  so  Grecianism  spread.  Already
Greek  was  spoken  and  understood  by  all  the  educated  classes
in  the  country ;  it  was  necessary  for  intercourse  with  the
Roman  authorities,  with  the  many  civil  and  military  officials,
and  with  strangers  ;  the  "superscription"  on  the  coins  was  in
Greek,  even  though,  to  humour  the  Jews,  none  of  the  earlier
Herods  had  his  own  image  impressed  on  them.1  Signifi-
cantly enough,  it  was  Herod  Agrippa  I.,  the  murderer  of  St.
James,  and  the  would-be  murderer  of  St.  Feter,  who  introduced
the  un-Jewish  practice  of  images  on  coins.  Thus  everywhere
the  foreign  element  was  advancing.  A  change  or  else  a
struggle  was  inevitable  in  the  near  future.

And  what  of  Judaism  itself  at  that  period  ?  It  was  miser-
ably divided,  even  though  no  outward  separation  had  taken
place.  The  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  held  opposite  principles,
and  hated  each  other  ;  the  Essenes  looked  down  upon  them
both.  Within  Pharisaism  the  schools  of  Hillel  and  Shammai
contradicted  each  other  on  almost  every  matter.  But  both
united  in  their  unbounded  contempt  of  what  they  designated
as  "  the  country-people " — those  who  had  no  traditional
learning,  and  hence  were  either  unable  or  unwilling  to  share
the  discussions,  and  to  bear  the  burdens  of  legal  ordinances,
which  constituted  the  chief  matter  of  traditionalism.  There
was  only  one-  feeling  common  to  all — high  and  low,  rich  and
poor,  learned  and  unlettered  :  it  was  that  of  intense  hatred  of
the  foreigner.  The  rude  Galileans  were  as  "  national "  as  the

1  The  coin  mentioned  in  Matt.  xxii.  20,  which  bore  an  "image,"  as  well  as  a
"superscription,"  must  therefore  have  been  either  struck  in  Rome,  or  else  one  of
the  tetrarch  Philip,  who  was  the  first  to  introduce  the  ixnage  of  Cnesar  on  strictly
Jewish  coins.


26  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

most  punctilious  Pharisees ;  indeed,  in  the  war  against  Rome
they  furnished  the  most  and  the  bravest  soldiers.  Everywhere
the  foreigner  was  in  sight ;  his  were  the  taxes  levied,  the
soldiery,  the  courts  of  ultimate  appeal,  the  government.  In
Jerusalem  they  hung  over  the  Temple  as  a  guard  in  the
fortress  of  Antonia,  and  even  kept  in  their  custody  the  high-
priest's  garments,1  so  that,  before  officiating  in  the  Temple,  he
had  actually  always  to  apply  for  them  to  the  procurator  or
his  representative !  They  were  only  just  more  tolerable  as
being  downright  heathens  than  the  Herodians,  who  mingled
Judaism  with  heathenism,  and,  having  sprung  from  foreign
slaves,  had  arrogated  to  themselves  the  kingdom  of  the
Maccabees.

Readers  of  the  New  Testament  know  what  separation
Pharisaical  Jews  made  between  themselves  and  heathens.  It
will  be  readily  understood,  that  every  contact  with  heathenism
and  all  aid  to  its  rites  should  have  been  forbidden,  and  that  in
social  intercourse  any  levitical  defilement,  arising  from  the  use
of  what  was  "common  or  unclean,"  was  avoided.  But  Pharisa-
ism went  a  great  deal  further  than  this.  Three  days  before  a
heathen  festival  all  transactions  with  Gentiles  were  forbidden,
so  as  to  afford  them  neither  direct  nor  indirect  help  towards  their
rites ;  and  this  prohibition  extended  even  to  private  festivities,

1  The  practice  commenced  innocently  enough.  The  high-priest  Hyrcanus,
who  built  the  Tower  of  Baris,  kept  his  dress  there,  and  his  sons  continued  the
practice.  When  Herod  seized  the  government,  he  retained,  for  reasons  readily
understood,  this  custody,  in  the  fortress  of  Antonia,  which  he  had  substituted
for  the  ancient  tower.  On  similar  grounds  the  Romans  followed  the  lead  of
Herod.  Josephus  (Ant.  xviii.  4,  4)  describes  "the  stone  chamber"  in  which
these  garments  were  kept,  under  seal  of  the  priests,  with  a  light  continually  burning
there.  Vitellius,  the  successor  of  Pilate,  restored  to  the  Jews  the  custody  of  the
high-priestly  garments,  when  .they  were  kept  in  a  special  apartment  in  the
Temple..


yews  and  Gentiles  in  "the  Land."  27

such  as  a  birthday,  the  day  of  return  from  a  journey,  etc
On  heathen  festive  occasions  a  pious  Jew  should  avoid,  if
possible,  passing  through  a  heathen  city,  certainly  all  dealings
in  shops  that  were  festively  decorated.  It  was  unlawful  for
Jewish  workmen  to  assist  in  anything  that  might  be  subser-
vient either  to  heathen  worship  or  heathen  rule,  including  in
the  latter  the  erection  of  court-houses  and  similar  buildings.
It  need  not  be  explained  to  what  lengths  or  into  what  details
Pharisaical  punctiliousness  carried  all  these  ordinances.  From
the  New  Testament  we  know,  that  to  enter  the  house  of  a
heathen  denied  till  the  evening  (John  xviii.  28),  and  that  all
familiar  intercourse  with  Gentiles  was  forbidden  (Acts  x.  28).
So  terrible  was  the  intolerance,  that  a  Jewess  was  actually
forbidden  to  give  help  to  her  heathen  neighbour,  when  about
to  become  a  mother  (Avod.  S.  ii.  i) !  It  was  not  a  new
question  to  St.  Paul,  when  the  Corinthians  inquired  about  the
lawfulness  of  meat  sold  in  the  shambles  or  served  up  at  a
feast  (i  Cor.  x.  25,  27,  28).  Evidently  he  had  the  Rabbinical
law  on  the  subject  before  his  mind,  while,  on  the  one  hand,  he
avoided  the  Pharisaical  bondage  of  the  letter,  and,  on  the  other,
guarded  against  either  injuring  one's  own  conscience,  or
offending  that  of  an  on-looker.  For,  according  to  Rabbi
Akiba,  "  Meat  which  is  about  to  be  brought  in  heathen  wor-
ship is  lawful,  but  that  which  comes  out  from  it  is  forbidden,
because  it  is  like  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead  "  (Avod.  S.  ii.  3).
But  the  separation  went  much  beyond  what  ordinary  minds
might  be  prepared  for.  Milk  drawn  from  a  cow  by  heathen
hands,  bread  and  oil  prepared  by  them,  might  indeed  be  sold
to  strangers,  but  not  used  by  Israelites.  No  pious  Jew  would
of  course  have  sat  down  at  the  table  of  a  Gentile  (Acts  xi.  3,
G:al  ii,  12).  If  a  heathen  were  invited  to  a  Jewish  house,  he


28  Sketches  of  Jeivisk  Life.

•

might  not  be  left  alone  in  the  room,  else  every  article  of  food
or  drink  on  the  table  was  henceforth  to  be  regarded  as  unclean.
If  cooking  utensils  were  bought  of  them,  they  had  to  be  puri-
fied by  fire  or  by  water  ;  knives  to  be  ground  anew,  spits  to  be
made  red-hot  before  use,  etc.  It  was  not  lawful  to  let  either
house  or  field,  nor  to  sell  cattle,  to  a  heathen  ;  any  article,
however  distantly  connected  with  heathenism,  was  to  be  de-
stroyed. Thus,  if  a  weaving-shuttle  had  been  made  of  wood
grown  in  a  grove  devoted  to  idols,  every  web  of  cloth  made
by  it  was  to  be  destroyed ;  nay,  if  such  pieces  had  been  mixed
with  others,  to  the  manufacture  of  which  no  possible  objection
could  have  been  taken,  these  all  became  unclean,  and  had  to
be  destroyed.1

These  are  only  general  statements  to  show  the  prevalent
feeling.  It  were  easy  to  prove  how  it  pervaded  every  rela-
tionship of  life.  The  heathens,  though  often  tolerant,  of
course  retorted.  Circumcision,  the  Sabbath-rest,  the  worship
of  an  invisible  God,  and  Jewish  abstinence  from  pork,  formed
a  never-ending  theme  of  merriment  to  the  heathen.2  Con-
querors are  not  often  chary  in  disguising  their  contempt  for
the  conquered,  especially  when  the  latter  presume  to  look
down  upon,  and  to  hate  them.  In  view  of  all  this,  what  an
almost  incredible  truth  must  it  have  seemed,  when  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  proclaimed  it  among  Israel  as  the  object  of  His
coming  and  kingdom,  not  to  make  of  the  Gentiles  Jews,  but  of
both  alike  children  of  one  Heavenly  Father  ;  not  to  rivet
upon  the  heathen  the  yoke  of  the  law,  but  to  deliver  from  it

1  These  particulars  are  gathered  from  the  Mishnic  tractate  Avoitah  Sarah  (idol-
worship),  although  we  have  designedly  given  only  a  general  outline.

2  For  details  compare  the  well-known  and  valuable  collection  of  Meier  (Jiuiaica
ten  -vet.  scr.  prof,  de  reb.  Jud.  frag.).


yews  and  Gentiles  in  "the  Land."  29

Jew  and  Gentile,  or  rather  to  fulfil  its  demands  for  all  !  The
most  unexpected  and  unprepared-for  revelation,  from  the
Jewish  point  of  view,  was  that  of  the  breaking  down  of
the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  the
taking  away  of  the  enmity  of  the  law,  and  the  nailing  it  to
His  cross.  There  was  nothing  analogous  to  it;  not  a  hint
of  it  to  be  found,  either  in  the  teaching  or  the  spirit  of  the
times.  Quite  the  opposite.  Assuredly,  the  roost  unlike
thing  to  Christ  were  His  times  ;  and  the  greatest  wonder
of  all — "  the  mystery  hidden  from  ages  and  generations  " —
the  foundation  of  one  universal  Church.


CHAPTER    III.

IN   GALILEE   AT  THE   TIME  OF   OUR   LORD.

**  I  £  any  one  wishes  to  be  rich,  let  him  go  north  ;  if  he
A  wants  to  be  wise,  let  him  come  south."  Such  was
the  saying,  by  which  Rabbinical  pride  distinguished  between
the  material  wealth  of  Galilee  and  the  supremacy  in  traditional
lore  claimed  for  the  academies  of  Judaea  proper.  Alas,  it
was  not  long  before  Judaea  lost  even  this  doubtful  distinction,
and  its  colleges  wandered  northwards,  ending  at  last  by  the
Lake  of  Gennesaret,  and  in  that  very  city  of  Tiberias  which  at
one  time  had  been  reputed  unclean  !  Assuredly,  the  history
of  nations  chronicles  their  judgment  ; ]  and  it  is  strangely
significant,  that  the  authoritative  collection  of  Jewish  tra-
ditional law,  known  as  the  Mishnah,  and  the  so-called  Jeru-
salem Talmud,  which  is  its  Palestinian  commentary,2  should
finally  have  issued  .from  what  was  originally  a  heathen  city,
built  upon  the  site  of  old  forsaken  graves.  TBut  so  long  as
Jerusalem  and  Judaea  were  the  centre  of  Jewish  learning,  no

1  "The  history  of  nations  is  the  Nemesis  of  nations  "  ("  Die  Weltgeschichte  ist
das  Weltgericht  "),  writes  Schiller.

2  There  are  two  Talmuds — the  Jerusalem  and  the  Babylonian — to  the  text  of
the   Mishnah.      The   Babylonian   Talmud  is  considerably  younger  than  that  of
Jerusalem,  and  its  traditions  far  more  deeply  tinged  with  superstition  and  error
of  every  kind.     For  historical  purposes,  also,  the  Jerusalem  Talmud  is  of  much
gi  eater  value  and  authority  than  that  of  the  Eastern  Schools.


In  Galilee  at  the   Time  of  our  Lord.  \\

terms  of  contempt  were  too  strong  to  express  the  supercilious
hauteur,  with  which  a  regular  Rabbinist  regarded  his  northern
co-religionists.  The  slighting  speech  of  Nathanael  (John  i.  4^),
"  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ? "  reads
quite  like  a  common  saying  of  the  period  ;  and  the  rebuke
of  the  Pharisees  to  Nicodemus  (John  vii.  52),  "Search,  and
look  :  for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  prophet,"  was  pointed  by
the  mocking  question,  "  Art  thou  also  of  Galilee  ? "  It  was
not  merely  self-conscious  superiority,  such  as  the  "  towns-
people," as  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  used  to  be  called
throughout  Palestine,  were  said  to  have  commonly  dis-
played towards  their  "  country  cousins  "  and  everyone  else,
but  offensive  contempt,  outspoken  sometimes  with  almost
incredible  rudeness,  want  of  delicacy  and  charity,  but  always
with  much  pious  self-assertion.  The  "  God,  I  thank  Thee
that  I  am  not  as  other  men"  (Luke  xviii.  11)  seems  like
the  natural  breath  of  Rabbinism  in  the  company  of  the
unlettered,  and  of  all  who  were  deemed  intellectual  or
religious  inferiors  ;  and  the  parabolic  history  of  the  Pharisee
and  the  publican  in  the  gospel  is  not  told  for  the  special
condemnation  of  that  one  prayer,  but  as  characteristic  of
the  whole  spirit  of  Pharisaism,  even  in  its  approaches  to  God.
"  This  people  who  knoweth  not  the  law  (that  is,  the  traditional
law)  are  cursed,"  was  the  curt  summary  of  the  Rabbinical
estimate  of  popular  opinion.  \  To  so  terrible  a  length  did  it  go"
that  the  Pharisees  would  fain  have  excluded  them,  not  only
from  common  intercourse,  but  from  witness-bearing,  and  that
they  even  applied  to  marriages  with  them  such  a  passage  as
Dent,  xxvii.  2 1.1

1  Every  one  who  is  curious  to  sec  tly  Jer^tTis  to  which  Pharisaical  pride  cou'd
gn  in  its  contempt  of  the  country  people  should  read  Pa.  49,  a  and  b.


32  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

7  But  if  these  be  regarded  as  extremes,  two  instances,
chosen  almost  at  random — one  from  religious,  the  other  from
ordinary  life — will  serve  to  illustrate  their  reality.  A  more
complete  parallel  to  the  Pharisee's  prayer  could  scarcely  be
imagined  than  the  following.  We  read  in  the  Talmud  (Jer.
Ber.  iv.  2)  that  a  celebrated  Rabbi  was  wont  every  day,  on
leaving  the  academy,  to  pray  in  these  terms  :  "  I  thank  Thee,
O  Lord  my  God  and  God  of  my  fathers,  that  Thou  hast  cast
my  lot  among  those  who  frequent  the  schools  and  synagogues,
and  not  among  those  who  attend  the  theatre  and  the  circus.
For,  both  I  and  they  work  and  watch — I  to  inherit  eternal
life,  they  for  their  destruction."  The  other  illustration,  also
taken  from  a  Rabbinical  work,  is,  if  possible,  even  more
offensive.  It  appears  that  Rabbi  Jannai,  while  travelling  by
the  way,  formed  acquaintance  with  a  man,  whom  he  thought
his  equal.  Presently  his  new  friend  invited  him  to  dinner,
and  liberally  set  before  him  meat  and  drink.  But  the  sus-
picions of  the  Rabbi  had  been  excited.  He  began  to  try  his
host  successively  by  questions  upon  the  text  of  Scripture,
upon  the  Mishnah,  allegorical  interpretations,  and  lastly  on
Talmudical  lore.  Alas !  on  neither  of  these  points  could  he
satisfy  the  Rabbi.  Dinner  was  over ;  and  Rabbi  Jannai,
who  by  that  time  no  doubt  had  displayed  all  the  hauteur  and
contempt  of  a  regular  Rabbinist  towards  the  unlettered,  called
upon  his  host,  as  customary,  to  take  the  cup  of  thanksgiving,
and  return  thanks.  But  the  latter  was  sufficiently  humiliated
to  reply,  with  a  mixture  of  Eastern  deference  and  Jewish
modesty,  "Let  Jannai  himself  give  thanks  in  his  own  house."
"  At  any  rate,"  observed  the  Rabbi,  "  you  can  join  with  me  ;  "
and  when  the  latter  had  agreed  to  this,  Jannai  said,  "A  dog
has  eaten  of  the  bread  of  Jannai  1 "


In  Galilee  at  the   Time  of  our  Lord.  33

Impartial  history,  however,  must  record  a  different  judg-
ment of  the  men  of  Galilee  from  that  pronounced  by  the
Rabbis,  and  that  even  wherein  they  were  despised  by  those
leaders  in  Israel.  Some  of  their  peculiarities,  indeed,  were
due  to  territorial  circumstances.  The  province  of  Galilee — of
which  the  name  might  be  rendered  "circuit,"  being  derived
from  a  verb  meaning  "  to  move  in  a  circle  " — covered  the
ancient  possessions  of  four  tribes  :  Issachar,  Zebulon,  Naph-
tali,  and  Asher.  The  name  occurs  already  in  the  Old
Testament  (compare  Josh.  xx.  7  ;  i  Kings  ix.  1 1  ;  2  Kings
xv.  29 ;  i  Chron.  vi.  76 ;  and  especially  Isa.  ix.  i).  In  the
time  of  Christ  it  stretched  northwards  to  the  possessions  of
Tyre  on  the  one  side,  and  to  Syria  on  the.  other ;  on  the
south  it  was  bounded  by  Samaria — Mount  Carmel  on  the
western,  and  the  district  of  Scythopolis  (in  the  Decapolis)  on
the  eastern  side,  being  here  landmarks  ;  while  the  Jordan  and
the  Lake  of  Gennesaret  formed  the  general  eastern  boundary-
line.  Thus  regarded,  it  would  include  names  to  which  such
reminiscences  attach  as  "the  mountains  of  Gilboa,"  where
"  Israel  and  Saul  fell  down  slain ; "  little  Hermon,  Tabor,
Carmel,  and  that  great  battle-field  of  Palestine,  the  plain  of
Jezreel.  Alike  the  Talmud  and  Josephus  divide  it  into  Upper
and  Lower  Galilee,  between  which  the  Rabbis  insert  the
district  of  Tiberias,  as  Middle  Galilee.1  We  are  reminded
of  the  history  of  Zaccheus  (Luke  xix.  4)  by  the  mark  which
the  Rabbis  give  to  distinguish  between  Upper  and  Lower
Galilee — the  former  beginning  "  where  sycomores  cease  to
grow."  The  sycomore,  which  is  a  species  of  fig,  must,  of
course,  not  be  confounded  with  our  sycamore,  -and  was  a  very
delicate  evergreen,  easily  destroyed  by  cold  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  47),

1  Shev.  ix.  2.


34  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

and  growing  only  in  the  Jordan  valley,  or  in  Lower  Galilee  up
to  the  sea-coast.  The  mention  of  that  tree  may  also  help  us  to
fix  the  locality  where  Luke  xvii.  6  was  spoken  by  the  Saviour.
The  Rabbis  mention  Kefar  Hananyah,  probably  the  modern
Kefr  Anan,  to  the  north-west  of  Safed,  as  the  first  place  in
Upper  Galilee.  Safed  was  truly  "  a  city  set  on  an  hill  ; "  and
as  such  may  have  been  in  view  of  the  Lord,  when  He  spoke
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  (Matt.  v.  14).  In  the  Talmud  it
is  mentioned  by  the  name  of  Zephath,  and  spoken  of  as  one
of  the  signal-stations,  whence  the  proclamation  of  the  new
moon,  made  by  the  Sanhedrin  in  Jerusalem,1  and  with  it
the  beginning  of  every  month,  was  telegraphed  by  fire-signals
from  hill  to  hill  throughout  the  land,  and  far  away  east  of  the
Jordan,  to  those  of  the  dispersion.

The  mountainous  part  in  the  north  of  Upper  Galilee  pre-
sented magnificent  scenery,  with  bracing  air.  Here  the  scene
of  the  Song  of  Solomon  is  partly  laid  (Cant.  vii.  5).  But  its
caves  and  fastnesses,  as  well  as  the  marshy  ground,  covered
with  reeds,  along  Lake  Merom,  gave  shelter  to  robbers,  out-
laws, and  rebel  chiefs.  Some  of  the  most  dangerous  charac-
ters came  from  the  Galilean  highlands.  A  little  farther  down,
and  the  scenery  changed.  South  of  Lake  Merom,  where
the  so-called  Jacob's  bridge  crosses  the  Jordan,  we  come
upon  the  great  caravan  road,  which  connected  Damascus  in
the  east  with  the  great  mart  of  Ptolemais,  on  the  shore  of  the
Mediterranean.  What  a  busy  life  did  this  road  constantly
present  in  the  days  of  our  Lord,  and  how  many  trades  and
occupations  did  it  call  into  existence !  All  day  long  they
passed — files  of  camels,  mules,  and  asses,  laden  with  the

1  See  my  book  on  The  Temple :  its  Minislry  and  Services  at  the  Time  oj  jksitf
Christ,  pp.  170,  251.


In  Galilee  at  the   Time  of  our  Lord.  35

riches  of  the  East,  destined  for  the  far  West,  or  bringing  the
luxuries  of  the  West  to  the  far  East.  Travellers  of  every
description — Jews,  Greeks,  Romans,  dwellers  in  the  East —
were  seen  here.  The  constant  intercourse  with  foreigners,
and  the  settlement  of  so  many  strangers  along  one  of
the  great  highways  of  the  world,  must  have  rendered  the
narrow-minded  bigotry  of  Judaea  well-nigh  impossible  in
Galilee.

We  are  now  in  Galilee  proper,  and  a  more  fertile  or
beautiful  region  could  scarcely  be  conceived.1  It  was  truly
the  land  where  Asher  dipped  his  foot  in  oil  (Deut  xxxiii.  24).
The  Rabbis  speak  of  the  oil  as  flowing  like  a  river,  and  they
say  that  it  was  easier  in  Galilee  to  rear  a  forest  of  olive-trees
than  one  child  in  Judsea  !  The  wine,  although  not  so  plen-
tiful as  the  oil,  was  generous  and  rich.  Corn  grew  in
abundance,  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Capernaum ;
flax  also  was  cultivated.  The  price  of  living  was  much  lower
than  in  Judsea,  where  one  measure  was  said  to  cost  as  much
as  five  in  Galilee.  Fruit  also  grew  to  perfection  ;  and  it  was
probably  a  piece  of  jealousy  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of
Jerusalem,  that  they  would  not  allow  it  to  be  sold  at  the
feasts  in  the  city,  lest  people  should  forsooth  say,  "  We  have
only  come  up  in  order  to  taste  fruit  from  Galilee."2  Josephus
speaks  of  the  country  in  perfectly  rapturous  terms.  He
counts  no  fewer  than  240  towns  and  villages,  and  speaks  of
the  smallest  as  containing  not  less  than  15,000  inhabitants!
This,  of  course,  must  be  gross  exaggeration,  as  it  would
make  the  country  more  than  twice  as  thickly  populated  as

1  See  also,  generally,  an  interesting  paper  on  "The  Fertility  of  Ancient  Pales-
tine" in  the  Quarterly  Statement  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund  for  July,
1876,  pp.  120-1*2.  2  Pes.  8  b.


36  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

the  densest  districts  in  England  or  Belgium.  Some  one  has
compared  Galilee  to  the  manufacturing  districts  of  this
country.  This  comparison,  of  course,  applies  only  to  the  fact
of  its  busy  life,  although  various  industries  were  also  carried
on  there — large  potteries  of  different  kinds,  and  dyeworks.
From  the  heights  of  Galilee  the  eye  would  rest  on  harbours,
filled  with  merchant  ships,  and  on  the  sea,  dotted  with  white
sails.  There,  by  the  shore,  and  also  inland,  smoked  furnaces,
where  glass  was  made ;  along  the  great  road  moved  the  cara-
vans; in  field,  vineyard,  and  orchard  all  was  activity.  The
great  road  quite  traversed  Galilee,  entering  it  where  the  Jor-
dan is  crossed  by  the  so-called  bridge  of  Jacob,  then  touching
Capernaum,  going  down  to  Nazareth,  and  passing  on  to
the  sea-coast.  This  was  one  advantage  that  Nazareth  had
— that  it  lay  on  the  route  of  the  world's  traffic  and  inter-
course. Another  peculiarity  is  strangely  unknown  to  Chris-
tian writers.  It  appears  from  ancient  Rabbinical  writings l
that  Nazareth  was  one  of  the  stations  of  the  priests.  All
the  priests  were  divided  into  twenty-four  courses,  one  of
which  was  always  on  ministry  in  the  Temple.  Now,  the
priests  of  the  course  which  was  to  be  on  duty  always
gathered  in  certain  towns,  whence  they  went  up  in  company
to  the  Temple ;  those  who  were  unable  to  go  spending  the
week  in  fasting  and  prayer  for  their  brethren.  Nazareth  was
one  of  these  priestly  centres ;  so  that  there,  with  symbolic
significance,  alike  those  passed  who  carried  on  the  traffic  of
the  world,  and  those  who  ministered  in  the  Temple.

We  have  spoken  of  Nazareth ;  and  a  few  brief  notices  of
other  places  in  Galilee,  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament,
may  be  of  interest.  Along  the  lake  lay,  north,  Capernaum,

1  See  the  reference  in  Neubauer,  p.  190.


In  Galilee  at  the   Time  of  our  Lord.  37

a  large  city  ;  and  near  it,  Chorazin,  so  celebrated  for  its  grain,
that,  if  it  had  been  closer  to  Jerusalem,  it  would  have  been
used  for  the  Temple;1  also  Bethsaida,2  the  name,  "house  of
fishes,"  indicating  its  trade.  Capernaum  was  the  station  where
Matthew  sat  at  the  receipt  of  custom  (Matt.  ix.  9).  South  of
Capernaum  was  Magdala,  the  city  of  dyers,  the  home  of  Mary
Magdalene  (Mark  xv.  40 ;  xvi.  I  ;  Luke  viii.  2  ;  John  xx.  i).
The  Talmud  mentions  its  shops  and  its  woolworks,  speaks
of  its  great  wealth,  but  also  of  the  corruption  of  its  inhabi-
tants. Tiberias,  which  had  been  built  shortly  before  Christ,
is  only  incidentally  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament  (John
vi.  i,  23  ;  xxi.  i).  At  the  time  it  was  a  splendid  but  chiefly
heathen  city,  whose  magnificent  buildings  contrasted  with  the
more  humble  dwellings  common  in  the  country.  Quite  at
the  southern  end  of  the  lake  was  Tarichaea,  the  great  fishing
place,  whence  preserved  fish  was  exported  in  casks  (Strabo,
xvi.  2).  It  was  there  that,  in  the  great  Roman  war,  a  kind
of  naval  battle  was  fought,  which  ended  in  terrible  slaughter,
no  quarter  being  given  by  the  Romans,  so  that  the  lake  was
dyed  red  with  the  blood  of  the  victims,  and  the  shore
rendered  pestilential  by  their  bodies.  Cana  in  Galilee  was
the  birthplace  of  Nathanael  (John  xxi.  2),  where  Christ  per-
formed His  first  miracle  (John  ii.  i-ii);  significant  also  in
connection  with  the  second  miracle  there  witnessed,  when  the
new  wine  of  the  kingdom  was  first  tasted  by  Gentile  lips
(John  iv.  46,  47).  Cana  lay  about  three  hours  to  the  north-
north-east  of  Nazareth.  Lastly,  Nain  was  one  of  the

1  Men.  85  a.

8  There  were  two  places  of  that  name,  one  east  of  the  Jordan,  Bethsaida  Julias,
referred  to  in  Luke  ix.  10  ;  Mark  viii.  22  ;  the  other  on  the  western  shore  of  the
Lake  of  Galilee,  the  birthplace  of  Andrew  and  Peter  (John  i.  44).  See  also  Mark
vi.  45  j  Matt.  xi.  21  ;  Luke  x.  13  ;  John  xii.  21,


38  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

southernmost   places  in  Galilee,    not   far   from   the   ancient
Endor.

It  can  scarcely  surprise  us,  however  interesting  it  may
prove,  that  such  Jewish  recollections  of  the  early  Christians  as
the  Rabbis  have  preserved,  should  linger  chiefly  around
Galilee.  Thus  we  have,  in  quite  the  apostolic  age,  mention
of  miraculous  cures  made,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  by  one
Jacob  of  Chefar  Sechanja  (in  Galilee),  one  of  the  Rabbis
violently  opposing  on  one  occasion  an  attempt  of  the  kind,
the  patient  meanwhile  dying  during  the  dispute ;  repeated
records  of  discussions  with  learned  Christians,  and  other
indications  of  contact  with  Hebrew  believers.  Some  have
gone  farther,1  and  found  traces  of  the  general  spread  of  such
views  in  the  fact  that  a  Galilean  teacher  is  introduced  in
Babylon  as  propounding  the  science  of  the  Merkabah,  or  the
mystical  doctrines  connected  with  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the
Divine  chariot,  which  certainly  contained  elements  closely
approximating  the  Christian  doctrines  of  the  Logos,  the
Trinity,  etc.  Trinitarian  views  have  also  been  suspected  in
the  significance  attached  to  the  number  "  three  "  by  a  Galilean
teacher  of  the  third  century,  in  this  wise  :  "  Blessed  be  God,
who  has  given  the  three  laws  (the  Pentateuch,  the  Prophets,
and  the  Hagiographa)  to  a  people  composed  of  three  classes
(Priests,  Levites,  and  laity),  through  him  who  was  the
youngest  of  three  (Miriam,  Airon,  and  Moses),  on  the  third
day  (of  their  separation — Exod.  xix.  16),  and  in  the  third
month."  There  is  yet  another  saying  of  a  Galilean  Rabbi,
referring  to  the  resurrection,  which,  although  far  from  clear,

1  See  generally  the  learned  volume  of  M.  Neubauer,  La  Geographie  du  Tatmud,
p.  1 86,  etc.  Compare,  also,  Derenbourg,  UHistoire  et  la  Geographie  de  la
Palestine,  pp.  347-365*


In  Galilee  at  the    Time  of  our  Lord.  39

may  bear  a  Christian  application.  Finally,  the  Midrash
applies  the  expression,  "  The  sinner  shall  be  taken  by  her "
(Eccl.  vii.  26),  either  to  the  above-named  Christian  Rabbi
Jacob,  or  to  Christians  generally,  or  even  to  Capernaum,  with
evident  reference  to  the  spread  of  Christianity  there.  We
cannot  here  pursue  this  very  interesting  subject  farther  than
to  say,  that  we  find  indications  of  Jewish  Christians  having
endeavoured  to  introduce  their  views  while  leading  the  public
devotions  of  the  Synagogue,  and  even  of  contact  with  the
immoral  heretical  sect  of  the  Nicolaitans  (Rev.  ii.  15).

Indeed,  what  we  know  of  the  Galileans  would  quite  prepare
us  for  expecting,  that  the  gospel  should  have  received  at  least
a  ready  hearing  among  many  of  them.  It  was  not  only,
that  Galilee  was  the  great  scene  of  our  Lord's  working  and
teaching,  and  the  home  of  His  first  disciples  and  apostles ;
nor  yet  that  the  frequent  intercourse  with  strangers  must
have  tended  to  remove  narrow  prejudices,  while  the  con-
tempt of  the  Rabbinists  would  loosen  attachment  to  the
strictest  Pharisaism  ;  but,  as  the  character  of  the  people  is
described  to  us  by  Josephus,  and  even  by  the  Rabbis,  they
seem  to  have  been  a  warm-hearted,  impulsive,  generous  race
— intensely  national  in  the  best  sense,  active,  not  given  to
idle  speculations  or  wire-drawn  logico-theological  distinctions,
but  conscientious  and  earnest.  The  Rabbis  detail  certain
theological  differences  between  Galilee  and  Judaea.  Without
here  mentioning  them,  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  that
they  show  more  earnest  practical  piety  and  strictness  of  life,
and  less  adherence  to  those  Pharisaical  distinctions  which  so
often  made  void  the  law.  The  Talmud,  on  the  other  hand,
charges  the  Galileans  with  neglecting  traditionalism  ;  learning
from  one  teacher,  then  from  another  (perhaps  because  they


40  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

had  only  wandering  Rabbis,  not  fixed  academies) ;  and  with
being  accordingly  unable  to  rise  to  the  heights  of  Rabbinical
distinctions  and  explanations.  That  their  hot  blood  made
them  rather  quarrelsome,  and  that  they  lived  in  a  chronic
state  of  rebellion  against  Rome,  we  gather  not  only  from
Josephus,  but  even  from  the  New  Testament  (Luke  xiii.  2  ;
Acts  v.  37).  Their .  mal-pronunciation  of  Hebrew,  or  rather
their  inability  properly  to  pronounce  the  gutturals,  formed  a
constant  subject  of  witticism  and  reproach,  so  current  that
even  the  servants  in  the  High  Priest's  palace  could  turn  round
upon  Peter,  and  say,  "  Surely  thou  also  art  one  of  them  ;  for
thy  speech  bewrayeth  thee  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  73) — a  remark  this,
by  the  way,  which  illustrates  the  fact  that  the  language  com-
monly used  at  the  time  of  Christ  in  Palestine  was  Aramaean,
not  Greek.  Josephus  describes  the  Galileans  as  hard-working,
manly,  and  brave ;  and  even  the  Talmud  admits  (Jer.  Cheth.
iv.  14)  that  they  cared  more  for  honour  than  for  money.

But  the  district  in  Galilee  to  which  the  mind  ever  reverts,
is  that  around  the  shores  of  its  lake.1  Its  beauty,  its  marvel-
lous vegetation,  its  almost  tropical  products,  its  wealth  and
populousness,  have  been  often  described.  The  Rabbis  derive
the  name  of  Gennesaret2  either  from  a  harp — because  the
fruits  of  its  shores  were  as  sweet  as  is  the  sound  of  a  harp—

1  The  New  Testament  speaks  so  often  of  the  occupation  of  fishers  by  the  Lake
of  Galilee,  that  it  is  interesting  to  know  that  fishing  on  the  lake  was  Jree  to  all.
The  Talmud  mentions  this  as  one  of  the  ten  ordinances  given  by  Joshua  of  old
(Baba  Kama,  80  b).

2  The  Biblical  name  Chinnereth  or  Chinneroth  (Numb,  xxxiv.  u,  and  in  other
places)  is  derived  by  the  Rabbis  from  "harp"  (chinnor) ;  and  its  post-biblical
form,  genessar,   is   represented   as  extracted  from  g'ener  sariw,    gardens   of  the
princes.     The   Biblical   name   is  really  "a   basin,"  so  that  it   can  scarcely  be
derived  from  the  town  of  Genussar,  as  M.  Neubauer  suggests  (ut  supra,  p.  25,
and  in  other  places).


In  Galilee  at  the  Time  of  our  Lord.  41

or  else  explain  it  to  mean  "  the  gardens  of  the  princes,"  from
the  beautiful  villas  and  gardens  around.  But  we  think  chiefly
not  of  those  fertile  fields  and  orchards,  nor  of  the  deep  blue
of  the  lake,  enclosed  between  hills,  nor  of  the  busy  towns,
nor  of  the  white  sails  spread  on  its  waters  —  but  of  Him,
Whose  feet  trod  its  shores ;  Who  taught,  and  worked,  and
prayed  there  for  us  sinners  ;  Who  walked  its  waters  and
calmed  its  storms,  and  Who  even  after  His  resurrection  held
there  sweet  converse  with  His  disciples  ;  nay,  Whose  last
words  on  earth,  spoken  from  thence,  come  to  us  with  peculiar
significance  and  application,  as  in  these  days  we  look  on  the
disturbing  elements  in  the  world  around :  "  What  is  that  to
thee?  Follow  thou  Me"  (John  xxl  22).


CHAPTER   IV.

TRAVELLING    IN    PALESTINE — ROADS,    INNS,    HOSPITALITY,
CUSTOM-HOUSE  OFFICERS,   TAXATION,   PUBLICANS.

IT  was  the  very  busiest  road  in  Palestine,  on  which  the
publican  Levi  Matthew  sat  at  the  receipt  of  "  custom,"
when  our  Lord  called  him  to  the  fellowship  of  the  Gospel,  and
he  then  made  that  great  feast  to  which  he  invited  his  fellow-
publicans,  that  they  also  might  see  and  hear  Him  in  Whom  he
had  found  life  and  peace  (Luke  v.  29).  For,  it  was  the  only
truly  international  road  of  all  those  which  passed  through
Palestine  ;  indeed,  it  formed  one  of  the  great  highways  of  the
world's  commerce.  At  the  time  of  which  we  write,  it  may  be
said,  in  general,  that  six  main  arteries  of  commerce  and
intercourse  traversed  the  country,  the  chief  objective  points
being  Caesarea,  the  military,  and  Jerusalem,  the  religious
capital.  First,  there  was  the  southern  road,  which  led  from
Jerusalem,  by  Bethlehem,  to  Hebron,  and  thence  westwards
to  Gaza,  and  eastwards  into  Arabia,  whence  also  a  direct  road
went  northwards  to  Damascus.  It  is  by  this  road  we  imagine
St.  Paul  to  have  travelled,  when  retiring  into  the  solitudes  of
Arabia,  immediately  after  his  conversion  (Gal.  i.  17,  18).  The
road  to  Hebron  must  have  been  much  frequented  by  priestly
and  other  pilgrims  to  the  city,  and  by  it  the  father  of  the


Travelling  in  Palestine.  43

Baptist  and  the  parents  of  Jesus  would  pass.  Secondly,  there
was  the  old  highway  along  the  sea-shore  from  Egypt  up
to  Tyre,  whence  a  straight,  but  not  so  much  frequented,  road
struck,  by  Caesarea  Philippi,  to  Damascus.  But  the  sea-shore
road  itself,  which  successively  touched  Gaza,  Ascalon,  Jamnia,
Lydda,  Diospolis,  and  finally  Caesarea  and  Ptolemais,  was
probably  the  most  important  military  highway  in  the  land,
connecting  the  capital  with  the  seat  of  the  Roman  procurator
at  Caesarea,  and  keeping  the  sea-board  and  its  harbours  free
for  communication.  This  road  branched  off  for  Jerusalem  at
Lydda,  where  it  bifurcated,  leading  either  by  Beth-horon  or
by  Emmaus,  which  was  the  longer  way.  It  was  probably  by
this  road  that  the  Roman  escort  hurried  off  St.  Paul  (Acts
xxiii.  31),  the  mounted  soldiers  leaving  him  at  Antipatris,
about  twenty  Roman  miles  from  Lydda,  and  altogether  from
Jerusalem  about  fifty-two  Roman  miles  (the  Roman  mile  being
1,618  yards,  the  English  mile  1,760).  Thus  the  distance  to
Caesarea,  still  left  to  be  traversed  next  morning  by  the  cavalry
would  be  about  twenty-six  Roman  miles,  or,  the  whole  way,
seventy-eight  Roman  miles  from  Jerusalem.  This  rate  of  tra-
velling, though  rapid,  cannot  be  regarded  as  excessive,  since  an
ordinary  day's  journey  is  computed  in  the  Talmud  (Pes.  93  b)
as  high  as  forty  Roman  miles.  A  //zz'n/road  led  from  Jerusalem,
by  Beth-horon  and  Lydda,  to  Joppa,  whence  it  continued  close
by  the  sea-shore  to  Caesarea.  This  was  the  road  which  Peter
and  his  companions  would  take  when  summoned  to  go  and
preach  the  gospel  to  Cornelius  (Acts  x.  23,  24).  It  was
at  Lydda,  thirty-two  Roman  miles  from  Jerusalem,  that
^Eneas  was  miraculously  healed,  and  "  nigh  "  to  it — within
a  few  miles — was  Joppa,  where  the  raising  of  Tabitha,
Dorcas,  "  the  gazelle  "  (Acts  ix.  32-43),  took  place.  Of  the


44  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

fourth  great  highway,  which  led  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem,
straight  through  Samaria,  branching  at  Sichem  eastwards  to
Damascus,  and  westwards  to  Caesarea,  it  is  needless  to  say  much,
since,  although  much  shorter,  it  was,  if  possible,  eschewed  by
Jewish  travellers;  though,  both  in  going  to  (Luke  ix.  53;
xvii.  i  i),and  returning  from  Jerusalem  (John  iv.  4, 43),  the  Lord
Jesus  passed  that  way.  The  road  from  Jerusalem  straight
northwards  also  branched  off  at  Gophna,  whence  it  led  across
to  Diospolis,  and  so  on  to  Caesarea.1  But  ordinarily,  Jewish
travellers  would,  rather  than  pass  through  Samaria,  face  the
danger  of  robbers  which  awaited  them  (Luke  x.  30)  along  the
fifth  great  highway  (comp.  Luke  xix.  I,  28  ;  Matt.  xx.  17,29),
that  led  from  Jerusalem,  by  Bethany,  to  Jericho.  Here  the
Jordan  was  forded,  and  the  road  led  to  Gilead,  and  thence  either
southwards,  or  else  north  to  Peraea,  whence  the  traveller  could
make  his  way  into  Galilee.  It  will  be  observed  that  all  these
roads,  whether  commercial  or  military,  were,  so  to  speak,
Judaean,  and  radiated  from  or  to  Jerusalem.  But  the  sixth  and
great  road,  which  passed  through  Galilee,  was  not  at  all  primarily
Jewish,  but  connected  the  East  with  the  West — Damascus  with
Rome.  From  Damascus  it  led  across  the  Jordan  to  Capernaum,
Tiberias,  and  Nain  (where  it  fell  in  with  a  direct  road  from
Samaria),  to  Nazareth,  and  thence  to  Ptolemais.  Thus,  from  its
position,  Nazareth  was  on  the  world's  great  highway.  What
was  spoken  there  might  equally  re-echo  throughout  Palestine,
and  be  carried  to  the  remotest  lands  of  the  East  and  of  the
West.

It  need  scarcely  be  said,  that  the  roads  which  we  have  thus

1  In  Conybeare  and  Howson's  Life  and  Epistlts  of  St,  Paul  (ii.  p.  331)  this
route  is  indicated  as  that  taken  by  the  Roman  soldiery,  when  conducting  St.  Paul
to  Caesarea.


Travelling  in  Palestine.  45

traced  are  only  those  along  the  principal  lines  of  communi-
cation. But  a  large  number  of  secondary  roads  also  traversed
the  country  in  all  directions.  Indeed,  from  earliest  times
much  attention  seems  to  have  been  given  to  facility  of  inter-
course throughout  the  land.  Even  in  the  days  of  Moses  we
read  of  "the  king's  highway"  (Numb.  xx.  17,  19;  xxi.  22).
In  Hebrew  we  have,  besides  the  two  general  terms  (derech
and  orach),  three  expressions  which  respectively  indicate  a
trodden  or  beaten-down  path  (nathiv,  from  natkav,  to  tread
down),  a  made  or  cast-up  road  (messillak,  from  salal,  to  cast  up),
and  "  the  king's  highway  " — the  latter,  evidently  for  national
purposes,  and  kept  up  at  the  public  expense.  In  the  time  of  the
kings  (for  example,  I  Kings  xii.  18),  and  even  earlier,  there  were
regular  carriage  roads,  although  we  can  scarcely  credit  the
statement  of  Josephus  (Antiq,  viii.  7,  4)  that  Solomon  had
caused  the  principal  roads  to  be  paved  with  black  stone —
probably  basalt.  Toll  was  apparently  levied  in  the  time  of
Ezra  (Ezra  iv.  13,  20)  ;  but  the  clergy  were  exempt  from  this
as  from  all  other  taxation  (vii.  24).  The  roads  to  the  cities  of
refuge  required  to  be  always  kept  in  good  order  (Deut.  xix.  3).
According  to  the  Talmud  they  were  to  be  forty-eight  feet  wide,
and  provided  with  bridges,  and  with  sign-posts  where  roads
diverged.

Passing  to  later  times,  the  Romans,  as  might  have  been
expected,  paid  great  attention  to  the  modes  of  communication
through  the  country.  The  military  roads  were  paved,  and  pro-
vided with  milestones.  But  the  country  roads  were  chiefly
bridle-paths.  The  Talmud  distinguishes  between  public  and
private  roads.  The  former  must  be  twenty-four,  the  latter  six
feet  wide.  It  is  added  that,  for  the  king's  highway,  and  for  the
road  taken  by  funerals,  there  is  no  measure  (Baba  B.  vi.  7).


46  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life,

Roads  were  annually  repaired  in  spring,  preparatory  for  going
up  to  the  great  feasts.  To  prevent  the  possibility  of  danger,
no  subterranean  structure,  however  protected,  was  allowed
under  a  public  road.  Overhanging  branches  of  trees  had  to  be
cut  down,  so  as  to  allow  a  man  on  a  camel  to  pass.  A  similar
rule  applied  to  balconies  and  projections  ;  nor  were  these
permitted  to  darken  a  street.  Any  one  allowing  things  to
accumulate  on  the  road,  or  dropping  them  from  a  cart,  had
to  make  good  what  damage  might  be  incurred  by  travellers.
Indeed,  in  towns  and  their  neighbourhood  the  police  regu-
lations were  even  more  strict ;  and  such  ordinances  occur  as
for  the  removal  within  thirty  days  of  rotten  trees  or  danger-
ous walls ;  not  to  pour  out  water  on  the  road  ;  not  to  throw
out  anything  on  the  street,  nor  to  leave  about  building
materials,  or  broken  glass,  or  thorns,  along  with  other
regulations  for  the  public  safety  and  health.1

Along  such  roads  passed  the  travellers  ;  few  at  first,  and
mostly  pilgrims,  but  gradually  growing  in  number,  as  com-
merce and  social  or  political  intercourse  increased.  Journeys
were  performed  on  foot,  upon  asses,  or  in  carriages  (Acts  viii.
28),  of  which  three  kinds  are  mentioned — the  round  carnage,
perhaps  like  our  gig ;  the  elongated,  like  a  bed  ;  and  the
cart,  chiefly  for  the  transport  of  goods.  It  will  be  understood
that  in  those  days  travelling  was  neither  comfortable  nor  easy.
Generally,  people  journeyed  in  company,  of  which  the  festive
bands  going  to  Jerusalem  are  a  well-known  instance.  If
otherwise,  one  would  prepare  for  a  journey  almost  as  for  a
change  of  residence,  and  provide  tent,  victuals,  and  all  that
was  needful  by  the  way.  It  was  otherwise  with  the  travel-
ling hawker,  who  was  welcomed  as  a  friend  in  every  district

1  Chiefly  gathered  from  the  juridical  tractates  Baba  Kama  and  Baba  Balhra.


Travelling  in  Palestine.  47

through  which  he  passed,  who  carried  the  news  of  the  day,
exchanged  the  products  of  one  for  those  of  another  district,
and  produced  the  latest  articles  of  commerce  or  of  luxury
Letters  were  only  conveyed  by  special  messengers,  or  through
travellers.

In  such  circumstances,  the  command,  "  Be  not  forgetful
to  entertain  strangers,"  had  a  special  meaning.  Israel  was
always  distinguished  for  hospitality ;  and  not  only  the  Bible,
but  the  Rabbis,  enjoin  this  in  the  strongest  terms.  In  Jeru-
salem no  man  was  to  account  a  house  as  only  his  own  ;  and
it  was  said,  that  during  the  pilgrim-feasts  none  ever  wanted
ready  reception.  The  tractate  A  both  (i.  5),  mentions  these
as  two  out  of  the  three  sayings  of  Jose,  the  son  of  Jochanan,
of  Jerusalem :  "  Let  thy  house  be  wide  open,  and  let  the
poor  be  the  children  of  thy  house."  Readers  of  the  New
Testament  will  be  specially  interested  to  know,  that,  accord-
ing to  the  Talmud  (Pes.  53),  Bethphage  and  Bethany,  to
which  in  this  respect  such  loving  memories  cling,  were
specially  celebrated  for  their  hospitality  towards  the  festive
pilgrims.  In  Jerusalem  it  seems  to  have  been  the  custom
to  hang  a  curtain  in  front  of  the  door,  to  indicate  that
there  was  still  room  for  guests.  Some  went  so  far  as  to
suggest,  there  should  be  four  doors  to  every  house,  to  bid
welcome  to  travellers  from  all  directions.  The  host  would
go  to  meet  an  expected  guest,  and  again  accompany  him
part  of  the  way  (Acts  xxi.  5).  The  Rabbis  declared  that
hospitality  involved  as  great,  and  greater  merit  than  early
morning  attendance  in  an  academy  of  learning.  They  could
scarcely  have  gone  farther,  considering  the  value  they  attached
to  study.  Of  course,  here  also  the  Rabbinical  order  had  the
preference  ;  and  hospitably  to  entertain  a  sage,  and  to  send


4  8  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

him  away  with  presents,  was  declared  as  meritorious  as  to
have  offered  the  daily  sacrifices  (Ber.  10,  b).

But  let  there  be  no  misunderstanding.  So  far  as  the  duty  of
hospitality  is  concerned,  or  the  loving  care  for  poor  and  sick,
it  were  impossible  to  take  a  higher  tone  than  that  of  Rabbin-
ism.  Thus  it  was  declared,  that  "  the  entertainment  of  travel-
lers was  as  great  a  matter  as  the  reception  of  the  Shechinah"
This  gives  a  fresh  meaning  to  the  admonition  of  the  Epistle
addressed  specially  to  the  Hebrews  (xiii.  2) :  "  Be  not  for-
getful to  entertain  strangers :  for  thereby  some  have  enter-
tained angels  unawares."  Bearing  on  this  subject,  one  of  the
oldest  Rabbinical  commentaries  has  a  very  beautiful  gloss  on
Ps.  cix.  31:  "He  shall  stand  at  the  right  hand  of  the  poor."
"  Whenever,"  we  read,  "  a  poor  man  stands  at  thy  door,  the
Holy  One,  blessed  be  His  Name,  stands  at  his  right  hand.  If
thou  givest  him  alms,  know  that  thou  shalt  receive  a  reward
from  Him  who  standeth  at  his  right  hand."  In  another  com-
mentary God  Himself  and  His  angels  are  said  to  visit  the  sick.
The  Talmud  itself  counts  hospitality  among  the  things  of
which  the  reward  is  received  alike  in  this  life  and  in  that
which  is  to  come  (S/mb.  127  a),  while  in  another  passage
(Sot.  14  a)  we  are  bidden  imitate  God  in  these  four  respects  :
He  clothed  the  naked  (Gen.  iii.  21) ;  He  visited  the  sick
(Gen.  xviii.  i)  ;  He  comforted  the  mourners  (Gen.  xxv.  n)  ;
and  He  buried  the  dead  (Deut.  xxxiv.  6).

In  treating  of  hospitality,  the  Rabbis  display,  as  in  so  many
relations  of  life,  the  utmost  tenderness  and  delicacy,  mixed
with  a  delightful  amount  of  shrewd  knowledge  of  the  world
and  quaint  humour.  As  a  rule,  they  enter  here  also  into  full
details.  Thus  the  very  manner  in  which  a  host  is  to  bear
himself  towards  his  guests  is  prescribed.  He  is  to  look


Travelling  in  Palestine.  49

pleased  when  entertaining  his  guests,  to  wait  upon  them  him-
self, to  promise  little  and  to  give  much,  etc.  At  the  same  time
it  was  also  caustically  added :  "  Consider  all  men  as  if  they
were  robbers,  but  treat  them  as  if  each  were  Rabbi  Gamaliel
himself !  "  On  the  other  hand,  rules  of  politeness  and  gratitude
are  equally  laid  down  for  the  guests.  "Do  not  throw  a
stone,"  it  was  said,  "into  the  spring  at  which  you  have  drunk"
(Baba  K.  92)  ;  or  this,  "  A  proper  guest  acknowledges  all,  and
saith,  '  At  what  trouble  my  host  has  been,  and  all  for  my
sake  ! ' — while  an  evil  visitor  remarks  :  *  Bah  !  what  trouble  has
he  taken  ? '  Then,  after  enumerating  how  little  he  has  had  in
the  house,  he  concludes  ;  '  And,  after  all,  it  was  not  done  for
me,  but  only  for  his  wife  and  children ! ' "  (Ber.  58  a).1
Indeed,  some  of  the  sayings  in  this  connection  are  remark-
ably parallel  to  the  directions  which  our  Lord  gave  to  His
disciples  on  going  forth  upon  their  mission  (Luke  x.  5-11,
and  parallels).  Thus,  one  was  to  inquire  for  the  welfare  of
the  family ;  not  to  go  from  house  to  house ;  to  eat  of  such
things  as  were  set  before  one ;  and,  finally,  to  part  with  a
blessing.

All  this,  of  course,  applied  to  entertainment  in  private
families.  On  unfrequented  roads,  where  villages  were  at
great  intervals,  or  even  outside  towns  (Luke  ii.  7),  there  were
regular  khans,  or  places  of  lodgment  for  strangers.  Like  the
modern  khans,  these  places  were  open,  and  generally  built  in
a  square,  the  large  court  in  the  middle  being  intended  for  the
beasts  of  burden  or  carriages,  while  rooms  opened  upon  gal-
leries all  around.  Of  course  these  rooms  were  not  furnished,
nor  was  any  payment  expected  from  the  wayfarer.  At  the

1  Abbreviated  from  the  Jer.  and  the  Bab.  Talmud.  See  also  Ber.  63  b  ;  64  a,
where  Scriptural  examples  of  the  blessing  attaching  to  hospitality  are  given.


50  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

same  time,  some  one  was  generally  attached  to  the  khan —
mostly  a  foreigner — who  would  for  payment  provide  any-
thing that  might  be  needful,  of  which  we  have  an  instance  in
the  parabolic  history  of  the  Good  Samaritan  (Luke  x.  35).
Such  hostelries  are  mentioned  so  early  as  in  the  history  of
Moses  (Gen.  xlii.  27;  xliii.  21).  Jeremiah  calls  them  "a
place  for  strangers"  (Jer.  xli.  17),  wrongly  rendered  "habi-
tation "  in  our  Authorised  Version.  In  the  Talmud  their
designations  are  either  Greek  or  Latin,  in  Aramaic  form —
one  of  them  being  the  same  as  that  used  in  Luke  x.  34 —
proving  that  such  places  were  chiefly  provided  by  and  for
strangers.1  In  later  times  we  also  read  of  the  oshpisa — evi-
dently from  hospitium,  and  showing  its  Roman  origin — as  a
house  of  public  entertainment,  where  such  food  as  locusts
pickled,  or  fried  in  flour  or  in  honey,  and  Median  or
Babylonian  beer,  Egyptian  drink,  and  home-made  cider  or
wine,  were  sold  ;  such  proverbs  circulating  among  the  boon
companions  as  "  To  eat  without  drinking  is  like  devouring
one's  own  blood "  (S/iab.  41  a),  and  where  wild  noise  and
games  of  chance  were  indulged  in  by  those  who  wasted  their
substance  by  riotous  living.  In  such  places  the  secret  police,
whom  Herod  employed,  would  ferret  out  the  opinions  of  the
populace  while  over  their  cups.2  That  police  must  have  been
largely  employed.  According  to  Josephus  (Ant.  xv.  iof  4)
spies  beset  the  people,  alike  in  town  and  country,  watching
their  conversations  in  the  unrestrained  confidence  of  friendly
intercourse.  Herod  himself  is  said  to  have  acted  in  that

'  In  the  ancient  Latin  Itineraries  of  Palestine,  journeys  are  computed  by
mansiones  (night-quarters)  and  mutationes  (change  of  horses) — from  five  to  eight
such  changes  being  computed  for  a  day's  journey.

*  See  a  very  graphic  scene  sketched  in  Delitzsch,  Handwerker-Lebtn  zur  Z.


Travelling  in  Palestine.  51

capacity,  and  to  have  lurked  about  the  streets  at  night-time
in  disguise  to  overhear  or  entrap  unwary  citizens.  Indeed,  at
one  time  the  city  seems  almost  to  have  been  under  martial  law,
the  citizens  being  forbidden  "  to  meet  together,  to  walk  or  eat
together," — presumably  to  hold  public  meetings,  demonstra-
tions, or  banquets.  History  sufficiently  records  what  terrible
vengeance  followed  the  slightest  suspicion.  The  New  Testa-
ment account  of  the  murder  of  all  the  little  children  at
Bethlehem  (Matt.  ii.  16),  in  hope  of  destroying  among  them
the  royal  scion  of  David,  is  thoroughly  in  character  with  all
that  we  know  of  Herod  and  his  reign.  There  is  at  least  in-
direct confirmation  of  this  narrative  in  Talmudical  writings,
as  there  is  evidence  that  all  the  genealogical  registers  in  the
Temple  were  destroyed  by  order  of  Herod.1  This  is  a  most
remarkable  fact.  The  Jews  retaliated  by  an  intensity  of
hatred  which  went  so  far  as  to  elevate  the  day  of  Herod's
death  (2  Shebet)  into  an  annual  feast-day,  on  which  all
mourning  was  prohibited.2

But  whether  passing  through  town  or  country,  by  quiet
side-roads  or  along  the  great  highway,  there  was  one  sight
and  scene  which  must  constantly  have  forced  itself  upon
the  attention  of  the  traveller,  and,  if  he  were  of  Jewish
descent,  would  ever  awaken  afresh  his  indignation  and
hatred.  Whithersoever  he  went,  he  encountered  in  city  or
country  the  well-known  foreign  tax-gatherer,  and  was  met  by
his  insolence,  by  his  vexatious  intrusion,  and  by  his  exactions.
The  fact  that  he  was  the  symbol  of  Israel's  subjection  to
foreign  domination,  galling  though  it  was,  had  probably  not

1  Hamburger,  Real  Enc.  P.  ii.  p.  293 ;  Jost,  Gesch.  d.  Jud.  i.  p.  324.

2  See  the  Meg.  Taan.  or  roll  of  fasts,  xi.  i.     Compare  on  this  date  Derenbourg,
Hist,  de  Pal.  p.  164,  165  ;  and  Gratz,  Gesch.  d.  J.  iii.  pp.  426,  427.


52  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

so  much  to  do  with  the  bitter  hatred  of  the  Rabbinists
towards  the  class  of  tax-farmers  (Moches)  and  tax-collec-
tors (Gabbai),  both  of  whom  were  placed  wholly  outside  the
pale  of  Jewish  society,  as  that  they  were  so  utterly  shameless
and  regardless  in  their  unconscientious  dealings.  For,  ever
since  their  return  from  Babylon,  the  Jews  must,  with  a  brief
interval,  have  been  accustomed  to  foreign  taxation.  At  the
time  of  Ezra  (Ezra  iv.  13,  20;  vii.  24)  they  paid  to  the  Per-
sian monarch  "  toll,  tribute,  and  custom  " — middaht  belo,  and
halach — or  rather  "ground-tax"  (income  and  property-tax  ?),
"  custom "  (levied  on  all  that  was  for  consumption,  or  im-
ported), and  "  toll,"  or  road-money.  Under  the  reign  of  the
Ptolemies  the  taxes  seem  to  have  been  farmed  to  the  highest
bidder,  the  price  varying  from  eight  to  sixteen  talents — that  is,
from  about  £3,140  to  about  £6,280 — a  very  small  sum  indeed,
which  enabled  the  Palestine  tax-farmers  to  acquire  immense
wealth,  and  that  although  they  had  continually  to  purchase
arms  and  court  favour. *  During  the  Syrian  rule  the  taxes
seem  to  have  consisted  of  tribute,  duty  on  salt,  a  third  of  the
produce  of  all  that  was  sown,  and  one-half  of  that  from  fruit-
trees,  besides  poll-tax,  custom  duty,  and  an  uncertain  kind
of  tax,  called  "  crown-money  "  (the  aurum  toronarium  of  the
Romans),  originally  an  annual  gift  of  a  crown  of  gold,
but  afterwards  compounded  for  in  money.2  Under  the
Herodians  the  royal  revenue  seems  to  have  been  derived
from  crown  lands,  from  a  property  and  income-tax,  from
import  and  export  duties,  and  from  a  duty  on  all  that  was
publicly  sold  and  bought,  to  which  must  be  added  a  tax
upon  houses  in  Jerusalem.

Heavily  as  these  exactions  must  have  weighed  upon  a  com-
1  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  4,  i,  3,  4,  5.  2  Ibid.  xii.  3,  3.


Travelling  in  Palestine.  53

paratively  poor  and  chiefly  agricultural  population,  they  refer
only  to  civil  taxation,  not  to  religious  dues.1  But,  even  so,
we  have  not  exhausted  the  list  of  contributions  demanded  of
a  Jew.  For,  every  town  and  community  levied  its  own  taxes
for  the  maintenance  of  synagogue,  elementary  schools,  public
baths,  the  support  of  the  poor,  the  maintenance  of  public
roads,  city  walls,  and  gates,  and  other  general  requirements.2
It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  the  Jewish  authorities
distributed  this  burden  of  civic  taxation  both  easily  and
kindly,  and  that  they  applied  the  revenues  derived  from  it
for  the  public  welfare  in  a  manner  scarcely  yet  attained  in
the  most  civilised  countries.  The  Rabbinical  arrangements
for  public  education,  health,  and  charity  were,  in  every
respect,  far  in  advance  of  modern  legislation,  although  here
also  they  took  care  themselves  not  to  take  the  grievous  bur-
dens which  they  laid  upon  others,  by  expressly  exempting
from  civic  taxes  all  those  who  devoted  themselves  to  the
study  of  the  law.

But  the  Roman  taxation,  which  bore  upon  Israel  with  such
crushing  weight,  was  quite  of  its  own  kind — systematic,  cruel,
relentless,  and  utterly  regardless.  In  general,  the  provinces
of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  what  of  Palestine  belonged  to
them,  were  subject  to  two  great  taxes — poll-tax  (or  rather
income-tax)  and  ground-tax.  All  property  and  income  that
fell  not  under  the  ground-tax  was  subject  to  poll-tax ;  which
amounted,  for  Syria  and  Cilicia,  to  one  per  cent.  The  "  poll-
tax  "  was  really  twofold,  consisting  of  income-tax  and  head-
money,  the  latter,  of  course,  the  same  in  all  cases,  and
levied  on  all  persons  (bond  or  free)  up  to  the  age  of  sixty-five

1  Comp.  my  Temple:  its  Ministry  and  Services  at  the  Time  of  Jesus  Christ,  p.  334.
*  For  a  brief  general  apenu  of  these  taxes,  see  Hamburger,  u.s.  p.  431.


54  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

— women  being  liable  from  the  age  of  twelve  and  men  from
that  of  fourteen.  Landed  property  was  subject  to  a  tax  of
one-tenth  of  all  grain,  and  one-fifth  of  the  wine  and  fruit
grown,  partly  paid  in  product  and  partly  commuted  into
money.1  Besides  these,  there  was  tax  and  duty  on  all  im-
ports and  exports,  levied  on  the  great  public  highways  and
in  the  seaports.  Then  there  was  bridge-money  and  road-
money,  and  duty  on  all  that  was  bought  and  sold  in  the
towns.2  These,  which  may  be  called  the  regular  taxes,  were
irrespective  of  any  forced  contributions,  and  of  the  support
which  had  to  be  furnished  to  the  Roman  procurator  and  his
household  and  court  at  Csesarea.  To  avoid  all  possible  loss
to  the  treasury,  the  proconsul  of  Syria,  Quirinus  (Cyrenius),
had  taken  a  regular  census  to  show  the  number  of  the
population  and  their  means.  This  was  a  terrible  crime  in  the
eyes  of  the  Rabbis,  who  remembered  that,  if  numbering  the
people  had  been  reckoned  such  great  sin  of  old,  the  evil  must
be  an  hundredfold  increased,  if  done  by  heathens  and  for  their
own  purposes.  Another  offence  lay  in  the  thought,  that
tribute,  hitherto  only  given  to  Jehovah,  was  now  to  be  paid
to  a  heathen  emperor.  "  Is  it  lawful  to  pay  tribute  unto
Caesar  ? "  was  a  sore  question,  which  many  an  Israelite  put
to  himself  as  he  placed  the  emperor's  poll-tax  beside  the  half-
shekel  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the  tithe  of  his  field,  vineyard,
and  orchard,  claimed  by  the  tax-gatherer,  along  with  that
which  he  had  hitherto  only  given  unto  the  Lord.  Even  the
purpose  with  which  this  inquiry  was  brought  before  Christ —

1  Northern  Africa  alone  (exclusive  of  Egypt)  furnished  Rome,  by  way  of  taxa-
tion, with  sufficient  corn  to  last  eight  months,  and  the  city  of  Alexandria  to  last
(bur  months  (Jewish  Wars,  ii.  1 6,  4).

"  Compare,  among  others,  Hausrath,  Neutest.  Zdtg.  i.  p.  167,  etc.


Travelling  in  Palestine.  55

to  entrap  Him  in  a  political  denunciation — shows,  how  much
it  was  agitated  among  patriotic  Jews  ;  and  it  cost  rivers  of
blood  before  it  was  not  answered,  but  silenced.

The  Romans  had  a  peculiar  way  of  levying  these  taxes—-
not directly,  but  indirectly — which  kept  the  treasury  quite
safe,  whatever  harm  it  might  inflict  on  the  taxpayer,  while
at  the  same  time  it  threw  upon  him  the  whole  cost  of  the
collection.  Senators  and  magistrates  were  prohibited  from
engaging  in  business  or  trade ;  but  the  highest  order,  the
equestrian,  was  largely  composed  of  great  capitalists.  These
Roman  knights  formed  joint-stock  companies,  which  bought
at  public  auction  the  revenues  of  a  province  at  a  fixed  price,
generally  for  five  years.  The  board  had  its  chairman,  or
magister,  and  its  offices  at  Rome.  These  were  the  real  Publi-
cani,  or  publicans,  who  often  underlet  certain  of  the  taxes.
The  Publicani,  or  those  who  held  from  them,  employed  either
slaves  or  some  of  the  lower  classes  in  the  country  as  tax-
gatherers — the  publicans  of  the  New  Testament.  Similarly,
all  other  imposts  were  farmed  and  colkcted ;  some  of  them
being  very  onerous,  and  amounting  to  an  ad  valorem  duty  of
two  and  a  half,  of  five,  and  in  articles  of  luxury  even  of  twelve
and  a  half  per  cent.  Harbour-dues  were  higher  than  ordinary
tolls,  and  smuggling  or  a  false  declaration  was  punished  by
confiscation  of  the  goods.  Thus  the  publicans  also  levied
import  and  export  dues,  bridge-toll,  road-money,  town-dues,
etc.  ;  and,  if  the  peaceable  inhabitant,  the  tiller  of  the  soil,
the  tradesman,  or  manufacturer  was  constantly  exposed  to
their  exactions,  the  traveller,  the  caravan,  or  the  pedlar
encountered  their  vexatious  presence  at  every  bridge,  along
the  road,  and  at  the  entrance  to  cities.  Every  bale  had  to
be  unloaded,  and  all  its  contents  tumbled  about  and


56  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

searched  ;  even  letters  were  opened  ;  and  it  must  have  taken
more  than  Eastern  patience  to  bear  their  insolence  and  to
submit  to  their  "  unjust  accusations  "  in  arbitrarily  fixing  the
return  from  land  or  income,  or  the  value  of  goods,  etc.  For
there  was  no  use  appealing  against  them,  although  the  law
allowed  this,  since  the  judges  themselves  were  the  direct
beneficiaries  by  the  revenue  ;  for  they  before  whom  accusa-
tions on  this  score  would  have  to  be  laid,  belonged  to  the
order  of  knights,  who  were  the  very  persons  implicated  in  the
farming  of  the  revenue.  Of  course,  the  joint-stock  company
of  Publicani  at  Rome  expected  its  handsome  dividends  ;  so
did  the  tax-gatherers  in  the  provinces,  and  those  to  whom
they  on  occasions  sublet  the  imposts.  All  wanted  to  make
money  of  the  poor  people ;  and  the  cost  of  the  collection
had  of  course  to  be  added  to  the  taxation.  We  can  quite
understand  how  Zaccheus,  one  of  the  supervisors  of  these
tax-gatherers  in  the  district  of  Jericho,  which,  from  its
growth  and  export  of  balsam,  must  have  yielded  a  large
revenue,  should,  in  remembering  his  past  life,  have  at  once
said :  "  If  I  have  taken  anything  from  any  man  by  false  accu-
sation " — or,  rather,  "  Whatever  I  have  wrongfully  exacted  of
any  man."1  For  nothing  was  more  common  than  for  the
publican  to  put  a  fictitious  value  on  property  or  income.
Another  favourite  trick  of  theirs  was  to  advance  the  tax
to  those  who  were  unable  to  pay,  and  then  to  charge
usurious  interest  on  what  had  thereby  become  a  private
debt.  How  summarily  and  harshly  such  debts  were  ex-
acted, appears  from  the  New  Testament  itself.  In  Matt,
xviii.  28  we  read  of  a  creditor  who,  for  the  small  debt
of  one  hundred  denars  (about  £3  6s.  8d.),  seizes  the  debtor

-  Dean  Alford's  translation.


Travelling  in  Palestine.  57

by  the  throat  in  the  open  street,  and  drags  him  to  prison  ;
the  miserable  man,  in  his  fear  of  the  consequences,  in  vain
falling  down  at  his  feet,  and  beseeching  him  to  have  patience,
in  not  exacting  immediate  full  payment.  What  these  conse-
quences were,  we  learn  from  the  same  parable,  where  the
king  threatens  not  only  to  sell  off  all  that  his  debtor  has,  but
even  himself,  his  wife,  and  children  into  slavery  (ver.  25).
And  what  short  shrift  such  an  unhappy  man  had  to  expect
from  "  the  magistrate,"  appears  from  the  summary  procedure,
ending  in  imprisonment  till  "  the  last  mite "  had  been  paid,
described  in  Luke  xii.  58.

However,  therefore,  in  far-off  Rome,  Cicero  might  describe
the  Publicani  as  "  the  flower  of  knighthood,  the  ornament  of
the  state,  and  the  strength  of  the  republic,"  or  as  "  the  most
upright  and  respected  men,"  the  Rabbis  in  distant  Palestine
might  be  excused  for  their  intense  dislike  of  "  the  publicans,"
even  although  it  went  to  the  excess  of  declaring  them  incap-
able of  bearing  testimony  in  a  Jewish  court  of  law,  of  for-
bidding to  receive  their  charitable  gifts,  or  even  to  change
money  out  of  their  treasury  (Baba  K.  x.  i),  of  ranking
them  not  only  with  harlots  and  heathens,  but  with  highway-
men and  murderers  (Ned.  iii.  4),  and  of  even  declaring  them
excommunicate.  Indeed,  it  was  held  lawful  to  make  false
returns,  to  speak  untruth,  or  almost  to  use  any  means  to
avoid  paying  taxes  (Ned.  27  b. ;  28  a).  And  about  the  time
of  Christ  the  burden  of  such  exactions  must  have  been  felt
all  the  heavier  on  account  of  a  great  financial  crisis  in  the
Roman  Empire  (in  the  year  33  of  our  era),  which  involved
so  many  in  bankruptcy,  and  could  not  have  been  without  its
indirect  influence  even  upon  distant  Palestine.

Of  such   men — despised   Galileans,  unlettered   fishermen,


58  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

excommunicated  publicans — did  the  blessed  Lord,  in  His  self-
humiliation,  choose  His  closest  followers,  His  special  apostles  !
What  a  contrast  to  the  Pharisaical  notions  of  the  Messiah  and
His  kingdom  !  What  a  lesson  to  show,  that  it  was  not  "  by
might  nor  by  power,"  but  by  His  Spirit,  and  that  God  had
chosen  the  base  things  of  this  world,  and  things  that  were
despised,  to  confound  things  that  were  mighty  !  Assuredly,
this  offers  a  new  problem,  and  one  harder  of  solution  than  many
others,  to  those  who  would  explain  everything  by  natural
causes.  Whatever  they  may  say  of  the  superiority  of  Christ's
teaching  to  account  for  its  success,  no  religion  could  ever  have
been  more  weighted  ;  no  popular  cause  could  ever  have  pre-
sented itself  under  more  disadvantageous  circumstances  than
did  the  Gospel  of  Christ  to  the  Jews  of  Palestine.  Even  from
this  point  of  view,  to  the  historical  student  familiar  with  the
outer  and  inner  life  of  that  period,  there  is  no  other  explana-
tion of  the  establishment  of  Christ's  kingdom  than  the  power
of  the  Holy  Ghost.

Such  a  custom-house  officer  was  Matthew  Levi,  when  the
voice  of  our  Lord,  striking  to  the  inmost  depths  of  his  heart,
summoned  him  to  far  different  work.  It  was  a  wonder  that
the  Holy  One  should  speak  to  such  an  one  as  he;  and  oh!  in
what  different  accents  from  what  had  ever  fallen  on  his  ears.
But  it  was  not  merely  condescension,  kindness,  sympathy,
even  familiar  intercourse  with  one  usually  regarded  as  a  social
pariah  ;  it  was  the  closest  fellowship  ;  it  was  reception  into  the
innermost  circle  ;  it  was  a  call  to  the  highest  and  holiest  work
which  the  Lord  offered  to  Levi.  And  the  busy  road  on  which
he  sat  to  collect  customs  and  dues  would  now  no  more  know
the  familiar  face  of  Levi,  otherwise  than  as  that  of  a  messenger
of  peace,  who  brought  glad  tidings  of  great  joy.


CHAPTER   V.

IN  JUDAEA.

IF  Galilee  could  boast  of  the  beauty  of  its  scenery  and  the
fruitfulness  of  its  soil ;  of  being  the  mart  of  busy  life,
and  the  highway  of  intercourse  with  the  great  world  outside
Palestine,  Judaea  would  neither  covet  nor  envy  such  advan-
tages. Hers  was  quite  another  and  a  peculiar  claim.  Galilee
might  be  the  outer  court,  but  Judaea  was  like  the  inner  sanc-
tuary of  Israel.  True,  its  landscapes  were  comparatively
barren,  its  hills  bare  and  rocky,  its  wilderness  lonely ;  but
around  those  grey  limestone  mountains  gathered  the  sacred
history — one  might  almost  say,  the  romance  and  religion  of
Israel.  Turning  his  back  on  the  luxurious  richness  of  Galilee,
the  pilgrim,  even  in  the  literal  sense,  constantly  went  up
towards  Jerusalem.  Higher  and  higher  rose  the  everlasting
hills,  till  on  the  uppermost  he  beheld  the  sanctuary  of  his
God,  standing  out  from  all  around,  majestic  in  the  snowy
pureness  of  its  marble  and  glittering  gold.  As  the  hum  of
busy  life  gradually  faded  from  his  hearing,  and  he  advanced
into  the  solemn  stillness  and  loneliness,  the  well-known  sites
which  he  successively  passed  must  have  seemed  to  wake  the
echoes  of  the  history  of  his  people.  First,  he  approached
SJiiloht  Israel's  earliest  sanctuary,  where,  according  to  tradi


60  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

tion,  the  Ark  had  rested  for  370  years  less  one.  Next  came
Bethel,  with  its  sacred  memorial  of  patriarchal  history.  There,
as  the  Rabbis  had  it,  even  the  angel  of  death  was  shorn  of  his
power.  Then  he  stood  on  the  plateau  of  Ramah,  with  the
neighbouring  heights  of  Gibeon  and  Gibeah,  round  which  so
many  events  in  Jewish  history  had  clustered.  In  Ramah
Rachel  died,  and  was  buried.1  We  know  that  Jacob  set  up  a
pillar  on  her  grave.  Such  is  the  reverence  of  Orientals  for  the
resting-places  of  celebrated  historical  personages,  that  we  may
well  believe  it  to  have  been  the  same  pillar  which,  according  to
an  eye-witness,  still  marked  the  site  at  the  time  of  our  Lord.5*
Opposite  to  it  were  the  graves  of  Bilhah  and  of  Dinah.3  Only
five  miles  from  Jerusalem,  this  pillar  was,  no  doubt,  a  well-
known  landmark.  By  this  memorial  of  Jacob's  sorrow  and
shame  had  been  the  sad  meeting-place  of  the  captives  when
about  to  be  carried  into  Babylon  (Jer.  xl.  i).  There  was
bitter  wailing  at  parting  from  those  left  behind,  and  in  weary
prospect  of  hopeless  bondage,  and  still  bitterer  lamentation,
as  in  the  sight  of  friends,  relations  and  countrymen,  the  old
and  the  sick,  the  weakly,  and  women  and  children  were  piti-
lessly slaughtered,  not  to  encumber  the  conqueror's  home-
ward march.  Yet  a  third  time  was  Rachel's  pillar,  twice
before  the  memorial  of  Israel's  sorrow  and  shame,  to  re-echo
her  lamentation  over  yet  sorer  captivity  and  slaughter,  when

1  This  appears,  to  me  at  least,  the  inevitable  inference  from   I   Sam.  x.   2,  3,
and  Jer.   xxxi.  15.     Most  writers  have  concluded  from  Gen.  xxxv.  16,   19,  that
Rachel  was  buried  close  by  Bethlehem,  but  the  passage  does  not  necessarily  imply
this.      The  oldest  Jewish  Commentary  (Sifre,   ed.   Vienna,  p.   146)  supports  the
view  given  above  in  the  text.     M.  Neubauer  suggests  that  Rachel  had  died  in  the
possession   of  Ephraim,    and   been   buried    at   Bethlehem.     The   hypothesis  is
ingenious  but  fanciful.

2  Book  ofjubil.  cxxxii.  Apud  Hausrath,  Neutest.  ZtUg.  p.  26.
s  Ibid.  c.  p.  34.


In  Judcza*  61

the  Idumaean  Herod  massacred  her  innocent  children,  in
the  hope  of  destroying  with  them  Israel's  King  and  Israel's
kingdom.  Thus  was  her  cup  of  former  bondage  and  slaughter
filled,  and  the  words  of  Jeremy  the  prophet  fulfilled,  in  which
he  had  depicted  Rachel's  sorrow  over  her  children  (Matt,
ii.  17,  1 8).

But  westward  from  those  scenes,  where  the  mountains
shelved  down,  or  more  abruptly  descended  towards  the
Shephelah,  or  wolds  by  the  sea,  were  the  scenes  of  former
triumphs.  Here  Joshua  had  pursued  the  kings  of  the  south  ;
there  Samson  had  come  down  upon  the  Philistines,  and  here
for  long  years  had  war  been  waged  against  the  arch-enemy
of  Israel,  Philistia.  Turning  thence  to  the  south,  beyond  the
capital  was  royal  Bethlehem,  and  still  farther  the  priest-city
Hebron,  with  its  caves  holding  Israel's  most  precious  dust.
That  highland  plateau  was  the  wilderness  of  Judaea,  variously
named  from  the  villages  which  at  long  distances  dotted  it  j1
desolate,  lonely,  tenanted  only  by  the  solitary  shepherd,  or
the  great  proprietor,  like  Nabal,  whose  sheep  pastured  along
its  heights  and  in  its  glens.  This  had  long  been  the  home  of
outlaws,  or  of  those  who,  in  disgust  with  the  world,  had  retired
from  its  fellowship.  These  limestone  caves  had  been  the
hiding-place  of  David  and  his  followers ;  and  many  a  band
had  since  found  shelter  in  these  wilds.  Here  also  John
the  Baptist  prepared  for  his  work,  and  there,  at  the  time  of
which  we  write,  was  the  retreat  of  the  Essenes,  whom  a  vain
hope  of  finding  purity  in  separation  from  the  world  and  its
contact  had  brought  to  these  solitudes.  Beyond,  deep  down
in  a  mysterious  hollow,  stretched  the  smooth  surface  of  the

1  Such  as  Tekoah,  Engedi,  Ziph,  Maon,  and  Beersheba,  which  gave  their
names  to  districts  in  the  wilderness  of  Judaea.


62  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Dead  Sea,  a  perpetual  memorial  of  God  and  of  judgment.  On
its  western  shore  rose  the  castle  which  Herod  had  named
after  himself,  and  farther  south  that  almost  inaccessible  fast-
ness of  Masada,  the  scene  of  the  last  tragedy  in  the  great
Jewish  war.  Yet  from  the  wild  desolateness  of  the  Dead  Sea
it  was  but  a  few  hours  to  what  seemed  almost  an  earthly
paradise.  Flanked  and  defended  by  four  surrounding  forts,
lay  the  important  city  of  Jericho.  Herod  had  built  its  walls,
its  theatre  and  amphitheatre ;  Archelaus  its  new  palace,
surrounded  by  splendid  gardens.  Through  Jericho  led  the
pilgrim  way  from  Galilee,  followed  by  our  Lord  Himself
(Luke  xix.  i)  ;  and  there  also  passed  the  great  caravan-road,
which  connected  Arabia  with  Damascus.  The  fertility  of
its  soil,  and  its  tropical  produce,  were  almost  proverbial.  Its
palm-groves  and  gardens  of  roses,  but  especially  its  balsam-
plantations,  of  which  the  largest  was  behind  the  royal  palace,
were  the  fairy  land  of  the  old  world.  But  this  also  was  only  a
source  of  gain  to  the  hated  foreigner.  Rome  had  made  it  a
central  station  for  the  collection  of  tax  and  custom,  known
to  us  from  Gospel  history  as  that  by  which  the  chief  publican
Zaccheus  had  gotten  his  wealth.  Jericho,  with  its  general
trade  and  its  traffic  in  balsam — not  only  reputed  the  sweetest
perfume,  but  also  a  cherished  medicine  in  antiquity — was  a
coveted  prize  to  all  around.  A  strange  setting  for  such  a  gem
were  its  surroundings.  There  was  the  deep  depression  of  the
Arabah,  through  which  the  Jordan  wound,  first  with  tortuous
impetuosity,  and  then,  as  it  neared  the  Dead  Sea,  seemingly
almost  reluctant  to  lose  its  waters  in  that  slimy  mass.1
Pilgrims,  priests,  traders,  robbers,  anchorites,  wild  fanatics,
such  were  the  figures  to  be  met  on  that  strange  scene ;

1  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  vi.  5,  2.


In  Judcza.  63

and  almost  within  hearing  were  the  sacred  sounds  from  the
Temple-mount  in  the  distance.1

It  might  be  so,  as  the  heathen  historian  put  it  in  regard  to
Judaea,  that  no  one  could  have  wished  for  its  own  sake  to  wage
serious  warfare  for  its  possession.2  The  Jew  would  readily
concede  this.  It  was  not  material  wealth  which  attracted
him  hither,  although  the  riches  brought  into  the  Temple  from
all  quarters  of  the  world  ever  attracted  the  cupidity  of  the
Gentiles.  To  the  Jew  this  was  the  true  home  of  his  soul,  the
centre  of  his  inmost  life,  the  longing  of  his  heart.  "  If  I  for-
get thee,  O  Jerusalem,  let  my  right  hand  forget  her  cunning,"
sang  they  who  sat  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon,  weeping  as
they  remembered  Zion.  "  If  I  do  not  remember  thee,  let  my
tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth  ;  if  I  prefer  not  Jeru-
salem above  my  chief  joy"  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  5,  6).  It  is  from
such  pilgrim-psalms  by  the  way  as  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  or  from
the  Songs  of  Ascent  to  the  Holy  City,3  that  we  learn  the
feelings  of  Israel,  culminating  in  this  mingled  outpouring  of
prayer  and  praise,  with  which  they  greeted  the  city  of  their
longings  as  first  it  burst  on  their  view :

Jehovah  hath  chosen  Zion ;

He  hath  desired  it  for  His  habitation.

This  is  my  rest  for  ever :

Here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  desire  after  it !

I  will  abundantly  bless  her  provision  :

I  will  satisfy  her  poor  with  bread.

I  will  also  clothe  her  priests  with  salvation  :

And  her  saints  shall  shout  aloud  for  joy.


»  According  to  the  Jems.  Talmud  (Succ.  v.  3)  six  different  acts  of  ministry  ir
riie  Temple  were  heard  as  far  as  Jericho,  and  the  smell  of  the  burning  incense
also  could  be  perceived  there.  We  need  scarcely  say  that  this  was  a  gross
exaggeration.

2  Strabo,  Geogr.  xvi.  2.  3  Commonly  known  as  the  Psalms  of  Degrees.


64  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

There  will  I  make  the  horn  of  David  to  bud J
I  ordain  a  lamp  for  Mine  anointed.
His  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  shame  :
But  upon  himself  shall  his  crown  nourish.

(Ps.  cxxxii.  13-18.)

Words  these,  true  alike  in  their  literal  and  spiritual  appli-
cations ;  highest  hopes  which,  for  nigh  two  thousand  years,
have  formed  and  still  form  part  of  Israel's  daily  prayer,  when
they  plead  :  "  Speedily  cause  Thou  '  the  Branch  of  David/
Thy  servant,  to  shoot  forth,  and  exalt  Thou  his  horn  through
Thy  salvation." l  Alas,  that  Israel  knows  not  the  fulfilment
of  these  hopes  already  granted  and  expressed  in  the  thanks-
giving of  the  father  of  the  Baptist :  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God
of  Israel ;  for  He  hath  visited  and  redeemed  His  people,  and
hath  raised  up  an  horn  of  salvation  for  us  in  the  house  of  His
servant  David ;  as  He  spake  by  the  mouth  of  His  holy
prophets,  which  have  been  since  the  world  began"  (Luke
i.  68-;o).2

Such  blessings,  and  much  more,  were  not  only  objects  of
hope,  but  realities  alike  to  the  Rabbinist  and  the  unlettered
Jew.  They  determined  him  willingly  to  bend  the  neck  under
a  yoke  of  ordinances  otherwise  unbearable  ;  submit  to  claims
and  treatment  against  which  his  nature  would  otherwise  have
rebelled,  endure  scorn  and  persecutions  which  would  have
broken  any  other  nationality  and  crushed  any  other  religion.
To  the  far  exiles  of  the  Dispersion,  this  was  the  one  fold,  with
its  promise  of  good  shepherding,  of  green  pastures,  and  quiet
waters.  Judaea  was,  so  to  speak,  their  Campo  Santo,  with  the
Temple  in  the  midst  of  it,  as  the  symbol  and  prophecy  of

1  This  is  the  fifteenth  of  the  eighteen  "benedictions  "  in  the  daily  prayers

2  Compare  Delitzsch,  Comm.  u.  d.  Ps.  ii.  p.  269.


In  Judaa.  65

Israel's  resurrection.  To  stand,  if  it  were  but  once,  within
its  sacred  courts,  to  mingle  with  its  worshippers,  to  bring
offerings,  to  see  the  white-robed  throng  of  ministering  priests,
to  hear  the  chant  of  Levites,  to  watch  the  smoke  of  sacrifices
uprising  to  heaven — to  be  there,  to  take  part  in  it  was  the
delicious  dream  of  life,  a  very  heaven  upon  earth,  the  earnest
of  fulfilling  prophecy.  No  wonder,  that  on  the  great  feasts
the  population  of  Jerusalem  and  of  its  neighbourhood,  so  far  as
reckoned  within  its  sacred  girdle,  swelled  to  millions,  among
whom  were  "  devout  men,  out  of  every  nation  under  heaven '
(Acts  ii.  5),  or  that  treasure  poured  in  from  all  parts  of  the
inhabited  world.1  And  this  increasingly,  as  sign  after  sign
seemed  to  indicate  that  "  the  End  "  was  nearing.  Surely  tht
sands  of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  must  have  nearly  run  out.
The  promised  Messiah  might  at  any  moment  appear  and
"restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel."  From  the  statements  of
Josephus2  we  know  that  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  were
specially  resorted  to,  and  a  mass  of  the  most  interesting,
though  tangled,  apocalyptic  literature,  dating  from  that  period,
shows  what  had  been  the  popular  interpretation  of  unfulfilled
prophecy.8  The  oldest  Jewish  paraphrases  of  Scripture,  01
Targumim,  breathe  the  same  spirit.  Even  the  great  heathen
historians  note  this  general  expectancy  of  an  impending
Jewish  world-empire,  and  trace  to  it  the  origin  of  the

1  We  kno^v  that  in  the  year  62  the  contribution  from  these  four  extra- Palestinian
communities :    Apamea,   Laodicea,   Adramyttium,    and  Pergamos  amounted  to
upwards  of  /8,ooo.

2  For  example,  Ant.  x.  u,  J.

3  Nothing  can  well  be  more  interesting  or  important,  but  also  more  difficult,
than  the  study  of  this  literature,  known  as  the  pseudo-epigraphic  writings.     The
present,  however,  is  not  the  place  for  such  inquiries,  which  must  be  reserved  foi
wiuch  fuller  discussion.


66  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

rebellions  against  Rome. l  Not  even  the  allegorising  Jewish
philosophers  of  Alexandria  remained  uninfluenced  by  the
universal  hope.  Outside  Palestine  all  eyes  were  directed
towards  Judaea,  and  each  pilgrim  band  on  its  return,  or  way-
faring brother  on  his  journey,  might  bring  tidings  of  startling
events.  Within  the  land  the  feverish  anxiety  of  those  who
watched  the  scene  not  unfrequently  rose  to  delirium  and
frenzy.  Only  thus  can  we  account  for  the  appearance  of  so
many  false  Messiahs  and  for  the  crowds  which,  despite
repeated  disappointments,  were  ready  to  cherish  the  most
unlikely  anticipations.  It  was  thus  that  a  Tlieudas*  could
persuade  "  a  great  part  of  the  people  "  to  follow  him  to  the
brink  of  Jordan,  in  the  hope  of  seeing  its  waters  once  more
miraculously  divide,  as  before  Moses,  and  an  Egyptian
impostor  induce  them  to  go  out  to  the  Mount  of  Olives  in  the
expectation  of  seeing  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  fall  down  at  his
command.3  Nay,  such  was  the  infatuation  of  fanaticism,  that
while  the  Roman  soldiers  were  actually  preparing  to  set  the
Temple  on  fire,  a  false  prophet  could  assemble  6,000  men,
women,  and  children,  in  its  courts  and  porches  to  await  then
and  there  a  miraculous  deliverance  from  heaven.4  Nor  did
even  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  quench  these  expectations,  till  a
massacre,  more  terrible  in  some  respects  than  that  at  the
fall  of  Jerusalem,  extinguished  in  blood  the  last  public
Messianic  rising  against  Rome  under  Bar  Cochab*

For,  however  misdirected — so  far  as  related  to  the  person  of

1  Suet.  Vesp.  4 ;  Tac.  Hist.  v.  13.

2  Jos.  Ant.  xx.  5,  i.     Of  course  this  could  not  have  been  the  Theudas  of  Acts
v.  36,  37,  but  both  the  name  and  the  movement  were  not  solitary  in  Israel  at  the
time.

»  Jos.  Ant.  xx.  8,  6.  4  Jos.  Wars,  vL  5,  2.

'  See  my  History  of  the  Jewish  Nation^  pp.  215-227.


In  Judcza.  67

the  Christ  and  the  nature  of  His  kingdom — not  to  the  fact  or
time  of  His  coming,  nor  yet  to  the  character  of  Rome — such
thoughts  could  not  be  uprooted  otherwise  than  with  the  history
and  religion  of  Israel.  The  New  Testament  proceeds  upon
them,  as  well  as  the  Old  ;  Christians  and  Jews  alike  cherished
them.  In  the  language  of  St.  Paul,  this  was  "  the  hope  of  the
promise  made  of  God  unto  our  fathers  :  unto  which  our  twelve
tribes,  instantly  serving  God  day  and  night,hope  to  come"(Acts
xxvi.  6,  7).  It  was  this  which  sent  the  thrill  of  expectancy
through  the  whole  nation,  and  drew  crowds  to  Jordan,  when
an  obscure  anchorite,  who  did  not  even  pretend  to  attest  his
mission  by  any  miracle,  preached  repentance  in  view  of  the
near  coming  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  was  this  which  turned
all  eyes  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  humble  and  unpretending  as
were  His  origin,  His  circumstances,  and  His  followers,  and
which  diverted  the  attention  of  the  people  even  from  the
Temple  to  the  far-off  lake  of  despised  Galilee.  And  it
was  this  which  opened  every  home  to  the  messengers  whom
Christ  sent  forth,  by  two  and  two,  and  even  after  the
Crucifixion,  every  synagogue,  to  the  apostles  and  preachers
from  Judaea.  The  title  "  Son  of  man  "  was  familiar  to  those
who  had  drawn  their  ideas  of  the  Messiah  from  the  well-
known  pages  of  Daniel.  The  popular  apocalyptic  literature
of  that  period,  especially  the  so-called  "  Book  of  Enoch,"  not
only  kept  this  designation  in  popular  memory,  but  enlarged
on  the  judgment  which  He  was  to  execute  on  Gentile  kings
and  nations.1  "  Wilt  Thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom

1  The  following  as  a  specimen  must  suffice  for  the  present :  "And  this  Son  of
man,  whom  thou  hast  seen,  shall  stir  up  the  kings  and  the  mighty  from  their  layers,
and  the  powerful  from  their  thrones,  and  shall  loose  the  bridles  of  the  mighty  and
break  in  pieces  the  teeth  of  sinners.  And  He  shall  drive  the  kings  from
their  thrones  and  from  their  empires,  ii  they  do  not  exalt  nor  praise  Him,  nor


68  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

to  Israel  ? "  was  a  question  out  of  the  very  heart  of  Israel.
Even  John  the  Baptist,  in  the  gloom  of  his  lonely  prison,
staggered  not  at  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  but  at  the
manner  in  which  He  seemed  to  found  His  kingdom.1  He  had
expected  to  hear  the  blows  of  that  axe  which  he  had  lifted
fall  upon  the  barren  tree,  and  had  to  learn  that  the  inner-
most secret  of  that  kingdom — carried  not  in  earthquake  of
wrath,  nor  in  whirlwind  of  judgment,  but  breathed  in  the
still  small  voice  of  love  and  pity — was  comprehension,  not
exclusion  ;  healing,  not  destruction.

As  for  the  Rabbis,  the  leaders  of  public  opinion,  their
position  towards  the  kingdom  was  quite  different.  Although
in  the  rising  of  Bar  Cochab  the  great  Rabbi  Akiba  acted  as
the  religious  standard-bearer,  he  may  be  looked  upon  as
almost  an  exception.  His  character  was  that  of  an  enthusiast,
his  history  almost  a  romance.  But,  in  general,  the  Rabbis
did  not  identify  themselves  with  the  popular  Messianic  expec-
tations. Alike  the  Gospel-history  and  their  writings  show
not  merely  that  anti-spiritual  opposition  to  the  Church  which
we  might  have  expected,  but  coldness  and  distance  in  regard
to  all  such  movements.  Legal  rigorism  and  merciless  bigotry

gratefully  own  from  whence  the  kingdom  has  been  entrusted  to  them.  And  He
shall  drive  away  the  face  of  the  mighty,  and  shame  shall  fill  them  :  darkness  shall
be  their  dwelling  and  worms  their  bed,  and  they  shall  have  no  hope  of  rising
from  their  beds,  because  they  do  not  exalt  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  spirits.  .  .  .
And  they  shall  be  driven  forth  out  of  the  homes  of  His  congregation  and  of  the
faithful"  (Book  of  Enoch,  xlvi.  4,  5,  6,  8).  A  full  discussion  of  this  most  im-
portant subject,  and,  indeed,  of  many  kindred  matters,  must  be  reserved  for  a
work  on  the  Life  and  Times  of  our  Lord.

1  The  passage  above  referred  to  has  a  most  important  apologetic  interest.
None  but  a  truthful  history  would  have  recorded  the  doubts  of  John  the  Baptist ;
especially  when  they  brought  forward  the  real  difficulties  which  the  mission  of
Christ  raised  in  the  popular  mind ;  least  of  all  would  it  have  followed  up  the  state-
ment of  these  difficulties  by  such  an  encomium  as  the  Saviour  passed  upon  John.


In  Judcea.  69

are  not  fanaticism.  The  latter  is  chiefly  the  impulse  of  the
ill-informed.  Even  their  contemptuous  turning  away  from
"this  people  which  knoweth  not  the  law,"  as  "accursed,"
proves  them  incapable  of  a  fanaticism  which  recognises  a
brother  in  every  one  whose  heart  burns  with  the  same  fire,  no
matter  what  his  condition  otherwise.  The  great  text-book  of
Rabbinism,  the  Misknak,  is  almost  entirely  un-Messianic,  one
might  say  un-dogmatical.  The  method  of  the  Rabbis  was
purely  logical.  Where  not  a  record  of  facts  or  traditions,  the
Mishnah  is  purely  a  handbook  of  legal  determinations  in
their  utmost  logical  sequences,  only  enlivened  by  discussions
or  the  tale  of  instances  in  point.  The  whole  tendency  of  this
system  was  anti-Messianic.  Not  but  that  in  souls  so  devout
and  natures  so  ardent  enthusiasm  might  be  kindled,  but  that
all  their  studies  and  pursuits  went  in  the  contrary  direction.
Besides,  they  knew  full  well  how  little  of  power  was  left  them,
and  they  dreaded  losing  even  this.  The  fear  of  Rome  con-
stantly haunted  them.  Even  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem
the  leading  Rabbis  aimed  to  secure  their  safety,  and  their
after  history  shows,  frequently  recurring,  curious  instances
of  Rabbinical  intimacy  with  their  Roman  oppressors.  The
Sanhedrim  spoke  their  inmost  apprehensions,  when  in  that
secret  session  they  determined  to  kill  Jesus  from  fear  that,  if
He  were  allowed  to  go  on,  and  all  men  were  to  believe  on
Him,  the  Romans  would  come  and  take  away  both  their
place  and  nation  (John  xi.  48).  Yet  not  one  candid  mind
among  them  discussed  the  reality  of  His  miracles ;  not  one
generous  voice  was  raised  to  assert  the  principle  of  the
Messiah's  claims  and  kingdom,  even  though  they  had  rejected
those  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth!  The  question  of  the  Messiah
might  come  up  as  a  speculative  point ;  it  might  force  itself


70  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

upon  the  attention  of  the  Sanhedrim ;  but  it  was  not  of  per-
sonal, practical,  life-interest  to  them.  It  may  mark  only  one
aspect  of  the  question,  and  that  an  extreme  one,  yet  even
as  such  it  is  characteristic,  when  a  Rabbi  could  assert  that
"  between  the  present  and  the  days  of  the  Messiah  there  was
only  this  difference,  Israel's  servitude."

Quite  other  matters  engrossed  the  attention  of  the  Rabbis.
It  was  the  present  and  the  past,  not  the  future,  which  occupied
them — the  present  as  fixing  all  legal  determinations,  and  the
past  as  giving  sanction  to  this.  Judaea  proper  was  the  only
place  where  the  Shechinah  had  dwelt,  the  land  where  Jehovah
had  caused  His  temple  to  be  reared,  the  seat  of  the  San-
hedrim, the  place  where  alone  learning  and  real  piety  were
cultivated.  From  this  point  of  view  everything  was  judged.
Judaea  was  "grain,  Galilee  straw,  and  beyond  Jordan  chaff."
To  be  a  Judaean  was  to  be  "  an  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews."  It
has  already  been  stated  what  reproach  the  Rabbis  attached
to  Galilee  in  regard  to  its  language,  manners,  and  neglect  of
regular  study.  In  some  respects  the  very  legal  observances,
as  certainly  social  customs,  were  different  in  Judaea  from
Galilee.  Only  in  Judaea  could  Rabbis  be  ordained  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  ;  only  there  could  the  Sanhedrim  in  solemn
session  declare  and  proclaim  the  commencement  of  each
month,  on  which  the  arrangement  of  the  festive  calendar
depended.  Even  after  the  stress  of  political  necessity  had
driven  the  Rabbis  to  Galilee,  they  returned  to  Lydda  for
the  purpose,  and  it  needed  a  sharp  struggle  before  they
transferred  the  privilege  of  Judaea  to  other  regions  in  the
third  century  of  our  era  (Jer.  Sank.  i.  i,  18).  The  wine
for  use  in  the  Temple  was  brought  exclusively  from  Judaea,
not  only  because  it  was  better,  but  because  the  transport


In  Jndcea.  71

through  Samaria  would  have  rendered  it  defiled.  Indeed,
the  Mishnah  mentions  the  names  of  the  five  towns  whence
it  was  obtained.1  Similarly,  the  oil  used  was  derived  either
from  Judaea,  or,  if  from  Peraea,  the  olives  only  were  brought,
to  be  crushed  in  Jerusalem.3

The  question  what  cities  were  really  Jewish  was  of  con-
siderable importance,  so  far  as  concerned  ritual  questions,  and
it  occupied  the  earnest  attention  of  the  Rabbis.  It  is  not
easy  to  fix  the  exact  boundaries  of  Judaea  proper  towards
the  north-west.  To  include  the  sea-shore  in  the  province
of  Samaria  is  a  popular  mistake.  It  certainly  was  never
reckoned  with  it.  According  to  Josephus  (Jewish  Wars,  iii.
3,  5)  Judaea  proper  extended  along  the  sea-shore  as  far  north
as  Ptolemais  or  Acco.  The  Talmud  seems  to  exclude  at  least
the  northern  cities.  In  the  New  Testament  there  is  a  dis-
tinction made  between  Caesarea  and  the  province  of  Judaea
(Acts  xii.  19;  xxi.  10).  This  affords  one  of  the  indirect
evidences  not  only  of  the  intimate  acquaintance  of  the  writer
with  strictly  Rabbinical  views,  but  also  of  the  early  date  of
the  composition  of  the  Book  of  Acts.  For,  at  a  later  period
Caesarea  was  declared  to  belong  to  Judaea,  although  its
harbour  was  excluded  from  such  privileges,  and  all  east  and
west  of  it  pronounced  "  defiled."  Possibly,  it  may  have  been
added  to  the  cities  of  Judaea,  simply  because  afterwards  so
many  celebrated  Rabbis  resided  there.  The  importance
attaching  to  Caesarea  in  connection  with  the  preaching  of  the
Gospel  and  the  history  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  early  and  flourishing
Christian  churches  there  established  give  fresh  interest  to
all  notices  of  the  place.  Only  those  from  Jewish  sources  can

1  Compare  the  discussion  in  M.   Neubauer's  Gfogr.  du  Talm.  p.  84,  etc.,  and
the  Talmudical  passages  there  quoted.  2  Ut  supra.


J2  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

here  engage  our  attention.  It  were  out  of  place  here  to
describe  the  political  importance  of  Caesarea,  as  the  seat  of
the  Roman  power,  or  its  magnificent  harbour  and  buildings,
or  its  wealth  and  influence.  In  Jewish  writings  it  bears  the
same  name  by  which  we  know  it,  though  at  times  it  is
designated  after  its  fortifications  (Migdal  Shur,  M.  Zor,
M.  Nassi),  or  after  its  harbour  (Migdal  Shina),  once
.also  by  its  ancient  name,  the  tower  of  Straton.  The
population  consisted  of  a  mixture  of  Jews,  Greeks,  Syrians,
and  Samaritans,  and  tumults  between  them  were  the  first
signal  of  the  great  Jewish  war.  The  Talmud  calls  it  "  the
capital  of  the  kings."  As  the  seat  of  the  Roman  power  it
was  specially  hateful  to  the  Jews.  Accordingly  it  is  designated
as  the  "daughter  of  Edom — the  city  of  abomination  and
blasphemy,"  although  the  district  was,  for  its  riches,  called
"  the  land  of  life."  As  might  be  expected,  constant  difficulties
arose  between  the  Jewish  and  Roman  authorities  in  Caesarea,
and  bitter  are  the  complaints  against  the  unrighteousness  of
heathen  judges.  We  can  readily  understand,  that  to  a  Jew
Caesarea  was  the  symbol  of  Rome,  Rome  of  Edom — and
Edom  was  to  be  destroyed !  In  fact,  in  their  view  Jerusalem
and  Caesarea  could  not  really  co-exist.  It  is  in  this  sense  that
we  account  for  the  following  curious  passage :  "  If  you  are
told  that  Jerusalem  and  Caesarea  are  both  standing,  or  that
they  are  both  destroyed,  believe  it  not ;  but  if  you  are  told
that  one  of  them  is  destroyed  and  the  other  standing,  then
believe  it "  (Gitt.  16  a  ;  Meg.  6  a).  It  is  interesting  to  know  that
on  account  of  the  foreign  Jews  resident  in  Caesarea,  the  Rabbis
allowed  the  principal  prayers  to  be  said  in  Greek,  as  being
the  vernacular ;  and  that,  from  the  time  of  the  evangelist
Philip,  good  work  was  done  for  Christ  among  its  resident


In  Judcza.  73

Jews.     Indeed,  Jewish  writings  contain  special  notice  of  con-
troversies there  between  Jews  and  Christians.

A  brief  summary  of  Jewish  notices  of  certain  other  towns
in  Judaea,  mentioned  also  in  the  New  Testament,  may  throw
some  additional  light  on  the  sacred  narratives.  In  general,
the  Mishnah  divided  Judaea  proper  into  three  parts — mountain,
Shephelah,  and  valley  (Shev.  ix.  2),  to  whiph  we  must  add  the
city  of  Jerusalem  as  a  separate  district.1  And  here  we  have
another  striking  evidence  of  the  authenticity  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  especially  of  the  writings  of  St.  Luke.  Only  one  inti-
mately acquainted  with  the  state  of  matters  at  the  time  would,
with  the  Rabbis,  have  distinguished  Jerusalem  as  a  district
separate  from  all  the  rest  of  Judaea,  as  St.  Luke  markedly
does  on  several  occasions  (Luke  v.  17 ;  Acts  i.  8 ;  x.  39).2  When
the  Rabbis  speak  of  "  the  mountain,"  they  refer  to  the  district
north-east  and  north  of  Jerusalem,  also  known  as  "  the  royal
mount."  The  Shephelah,  of  course,  is  the  country  along  the
sea-shore.  All  the  rest  is  included  in  the  term  "  valley."  It
need  scarcely  be  explained  that,  as  the  Jerusalem  Talmud
tells  us,  this  is  merely  a  general  classification,  which  must  not
be  too  closely  pressed.  Of  the  eleven  toparchies  into  which,
according  to  Josephus,3  Judaea  proper  was  arranged,  the
Rabbis  take  no  notice,  although  some  of  their  names  have
been  traced  in  Talmudical  writings.  These  provinces  were
no  doubt  again  subdivided  into  districts  or  hyparchies,  just
as  the  towns  were  into  quarters  or  hegemonies,  both  terms

1  So  in  many  passages.     Compare,  for  example,  Cheth.  iv.  12.

2  These,  as  the  New  Testament  notices  about  Csesarea,  have  also  been  markc-d
by  M.  Neubauer  in  his  Geogr.  du  Tal.     It  is  to  be  desired  that  the  occasional
inaccuracies,  or  rather,  as  we  know,  misprints  in  the  Talmudic  references  should
be  corrected  by  the  learned  author.

*  Pliny  enumerates  only  ten.      Compare  Relanctits  (ed.  Nuremb.)  pp.  130,  131


74  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

occurring  in  the  Talmud.1  The  Rabbis  forbade  the  exportation
of  provisions  from  Palestine,  even  into  Syria.

Travelling  southward  from  Caesarea  we  are  in  the  plain  of
Sharon,  whose  beauty  and  richness  are  so  celebrated  in  Holy
Scripture  (Cant.  ii.  I  ;  Isa.  xxxv.  2).  This  plain  extends  as  far
as  Lydda,  where  it  merges  into  that  of  Darom,  which  stretches
farther  southwards.  In  accordance  with  the  statements  of
Holy  Scripture  (Isa.  Ixv.  10)  the  plain  of  Sharon  was  always
celebrated  for  its  pasturage.  According  to  the  Talmud  most
of  the  calves  for  sacrifices  were  brought  from  that  district
The  wine  of  Sharon  was  celebrated,  and,  for  beverage,  sup-
posed to  be  mixed  with  one-third  of  water.  The  plain  was  also
well  known  for  the  manufacture  of  pottery ;  but  it  must  have
been  of  an  inferior  kind,  since  the  Mishnah  (Baba  K.  vi.  2)  in
enumerating  for  what  proportion  of  damaged  goods  a  purchaser
might  not  claim  compensation,  allows  not  less  than  ten  per  cent,
for  breakage  in  the  pottery  of  Sharon.  In  Jer.  Sotah  viii.  3,
we  read  that  the  permission  to  return  from  war  did  not  apply  to
those  who  had  built  brick  houses  in  Sharon,  it  being  explained
that  the  clay  was  so. bad,  that  the  houses  had  to  be  rebuilt
within  seven  years.  Hence  also  the  annual  prayer  of  the  high-
priest  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  that  the  houses  of  the  men
of  Sharon  should  not  become  their  graves.2  Antipatris,  the
place  where  the  foot  soldiers  had  left  St.  Paul  in  charge  of  the
horsemen  (Acts  xxiii.  31),  had  once  been  the  scene  of  a  very
different  array.  For  it  was  here  that,  according  to  tradition
( Yoma,  69  a),  the  priesthood,  under  Simon  the  Just,  had  met
Alexander  the  Great  in  that  solemn  procession,  which  secured

1  See  on  this  and  generally  Neubauer,  p.  67,  et passim.

2  See  my  volume  on  The  Temple :  its  Ministry  and  Services^  p.  275.     Compare
also  Neubauer's  Geogr.  du  Tal.  in  locum.


In  Judcea.  75

the  safety  of  the  Temple.  In  Talmudical  writings  it  bears
the  same  name,  which  was  given  it  by  Herod,  in  memory  of
his  father  Antipater  (Ant.  xvi.  5,  2).  The  name  of  Chephar
Zaba,  however,  also  occurs,  possibly  that  of  an  adjoining
locality.  In  Sank.  94  b,  we  read  that  Hezekiah  had  sus-
pended a  board  at  the  entrance  of  the  Beth  Midrash  (or
college),  with  the  notification  that  whoever  studied  not  the
Law  was  to  be  destroyed.  Accordingly  they  searched  from
Dan  to  Beersheba,  and  found  not  a  single  unlettered  person,
nor  yet  from  Gebath  to  Antipatris,  boy  or  girl,  man  or
woman,  who  was  not  fully  versed  in  all  the  legal  ordinances
concerning  clean  and  unclean.

Another  remarkable  illustration  of  the  New  Testament  is
afforded  by  Lydda,  the  Talmudical  Lod  or  Lud.  We  read  that,
in  consequence  of  the  labours  of  St.  Peter  and  the  miracle
wrought  on  ^Eneas,  "all  that  dwelt  at  Lydda  and  Saron
.  .  .  .  turned  to  the  Lord"  (Acts  ix.  35).  The  brief
notice  of  Lydda  given  in  this  narrative  of  the  apostle's
labours,  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  Talmudical  notices,
although,  of  course,  we  must  not  expect  them  to  describe  the
progress  of  Christianity.  We  can  readily  believe  that  Lydda
had  its  congregation  of  "  saints,"  almost  from  the  first,  since  it
was  (Maas.  Sh.  v.  2)  within  an  easy  day's  journey  west  of
Jerusalem.  Indeed,  as  the  Talmud  explains,  the  second  tithes
(Deut.  xiv.  22  ;  xxvi.  12)  from  Lydda  could  not  be  converted
into  money,  but  had  to  be  brought  to  the  city  itself,  so  "  that
the  streets  of  Jerusalem  might  be  garlanded  with  fruits."  The
same  passage  illustrates  the  proximity  of  Lydda  to  the  city,
and  the  frequent  intercourse  between  the  two,1  by  saying  that

1  The  learned  Lightfoot  (Cent.  Chdrogr.  Matth.  prcemissa,  cxvi.)  argues,  that
this  was  intended  by  the  Rabbinists  to  show  that  no  material  damage  was  allowed
to  discourage  the  piety  of  the  women  of  Lydda.


76  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

the  women  of  Lydda  mixed  their  dough,  went  up  to  Jerusalem,
prayed  in  the  Temple,  and  returned  before  it  had  fermented.
Similarly,  we  infer  from  Talmudical  documents  that  Lydda
had  been  the  residence  of  many  Rabbis  before  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem.  After  that  event,  it  became  the  seat  of  a
very  celebrated  school,  presided  over  by  some  of  the  leaders
of  Jewish  thought.  It  was  this  school  which  boldly  laid  it
down,  that,  to  avoid  death,  every  ordinance  of  the  Law  might
be  broken,  except  those  in  regard  to  idolatry,  incest,  and
murder.  It  was  in  Lydda,  also,  that  two  brothers  voluntarily
offered  themselves  victims  to  save  their  co-religionists  from
slaughter,  threatened  because  a  body  had  been  found,  whose
death  was  imputed  to  the  Jews.  It  sounds  like  a  sad  echo
of  the  taunts  addressed  by  "chief  priests,"  "scribes  and
elders,"  to  Jesus  on  the  cross  (Matt,  xxvii.  41-43)  when,  on
the  occasion  just  mentioned,  the  Roman  thus  addressed  the
martyrs :  "  If  you  are  of  the  people  of  Ananias,  Mishael,
and  Azarias,  let  your  God  come,  and  save  you  from  my
hand!"  (Taan.  18,  6.)

But  a  much  more  interesting  chain  of  evidence  connects
Lydda  with  the  history  of  the  founding  of  the  Church.  It  is
in  connection  with  Lydda  and  its  tribunal,  which  is  declared
to  have  been  capable  of  pronouncing  sentence  of  death,  that
our  blessed  Lord  and  the  Virgin  Mother  are  introduced  in
certain  Talmudical  passages,  though  with  studiously  and
blasphemously  altered  names.1  The  statements  are,  in  their
present  form,  whether  from  ignorance,  design,  or  in  con-
sequence of  successive  alterations,  confused,  and  they  mix  up
different  events  and  persons  in  Gospel  history ;  among  other

1  A  very  ingenious  attempt  at  explaining  these  names  and  designations  has  been
made  by  Professor  Cassel  in  his  recent  brochure,  Caricaturnamen  Christi.


In  Judcza.  77

things  representing  our  Lord  as  condemned  at  Lydda.1  But
there  can  be  no  reasonable  question  that  they  refer  to  our
blessed  Lord  and  His  condemnation  for  supposed  blasphemy
and  seduction  of  the  people,  and  that  they  at  least  indicate  a
close  connection  between  Lydda  and  the  founding  of  Chris-
tianity.2 It  is  a  curious  confirmation  of  the  gospel  history,
that  the  death  of  Christ  is  there  described  as  having  taken
place  "  on  the  eve  of  the  Passover,"  remarkably  bearing  out
not  only  the  date  of  that  event  as  gathered  from  the  synoptical
gospels,  but  showing  that  the  Rabbis  at  least  knew  nothing  of
those  Jewish  scruples  and  difficulties,  by  which  modern  Gentile
writers  have  tried  to  prove  the  impossibility  of  Christ's  con-
demnation on  the  Paschal  night.3  It  has  already  been  stated
that,  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  many  and  most
celebrated  Rabbis  chose  Lydda  for  their  residence.  But  the
second  century  witnessed  a  great  change.  The  inhabitants  of
Lydda  are  now  charged  with  pride,  ignorance,  and  neglect
of  their  religion.  The  Midrash  (Esther  i.  3)  has  it,  that  there
were  "  ten  measures  of  wretchedness  in  the  world.  Nine  of
those  belong  to  Lod,  the  tenth  to  all  the  rest  of  the  world."
Lydda  was  the  last  place  in  Judaea  to  which,  after  their  migra-

1  May  there  not  perhaps  be  some  historical  foundation  even  for  this  statement  ?
Could  the  secret  gathering  of  "the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees,"  mentioned  in
John  xi.  47,  have  taken  place  in  Lydda  (compare  vers.  54,  55)  ?    Was  it  there,  that
Judas  "communed  with  the  chief  priests  and  captains,  how  he  might  betray  Him
unto  them  ?  "     There  were  at  any  rate  obvious  reasons  for  avoiding  Jerusalem  in
all  preliminary  measures  against  Jesus  j  and  we  know  that,  while  the  Temple  stood,
Lydda  was  the  only  place  out  of  Jerusalem  which  may  be  called  a  seat  of  the
Rabbinical  party.

2  All  the  passages  on  the  subject  are  collated  and  most  ably  argued  upon  in
Buxtorf,  Lex.  Talm.

3  See  the  discussion  on  the  date  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion  in  the  Appendix  to  my
volume  on  The  Temple :  its  Ministry  and  Services.


78  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

tion  into  Galilee,  the  Rabbis  resorted  to  fix  the  commence-
ment of  the  month.  Jewish  legend  has  it,  that  they  were  met
by  the  "evil  eye,"  which  caused  their  death.  There  may,
perhaps,  be  an  allegorical  allusion  in  this.  Certain  it  is,  that,
at  the  time,  Lydda  was  the  seat  of  a  most  flourishing
Christian  Church,  and  had  its  bishop.  Indeed,  a  learned
Jewish  writer  has  connected  the  changed  Jewish  feeling
towards  Lod  with  the  spread  of  Christianity.1  Lydda  must
have  been  a  very  beautiful  and  a  very  busy  place.  The
Talmud  speaks  in  exaggerated  terms  of  the  honey  of  its
dates,2  and  the  Mishnah  (Baba  M.  iv.  3)  refers  to  its
merchants  as  a  numerous  class,  although  their  honesty  is
not  extolled.3

Near  Lydda,  eastwards,  was  the  village  of  Chephar  Tabi.
We  might  be  tempted  to  derive  from  it  the  name  of  Tabitha
(Acts  ix.  36),  if  it  were  not  that  the  names  Tabi  and  Tabitha
had  been  so  common  at  the  time  in  Palestine.  There  can
be  no  question  of  the  situation  of  Joppa,  the  modern  Jaffa,
where  Peter  saw  the  vision  which  opened  the  door  of  the
Church  to  the  Gentiles.  Many  Rabbis  are  mentioned  in
connection  with  Joppa.  The  town  was  destroyed  by
Vespasian.  There  is  a  curious  legend  in  the  Midrash  to  the
effect  that  Joppa  was  not  overwhelmed  by  the  deluge.  Could
this  have  been  an  attempt  to  insinuate  the  preservation  and
migration  of  men  to  distant  parts  of  the  earth  ?  The  exact
location  of  Emmaus,  for  ever  sacred  to  us  by  the  manifestation
of  the  Saviour  to  the  two  disciples  (Luke  xxiv.  13),  is  matter

i  Neubauer,  p.  80.  2  Cheth.  iii.  a.

3  The  Mishnah  discusses  how  much  profit  a  merchant  is  allowed  to  take  on  an
article,  and  within  what  period  a  purchaser,  who  finds  himself  imposed  upon,  may
return  his  purchase.  The  merchants  of  Lydda  are  certainly  not  placed  in  this
discussion  in  the  most  advantageous  light.


In  Judcza.  79

of  controversy.  On  the  whole,  the  weight  of  evidence  still
inclines  to  the  traditional  site.1  If  so,  it  had  a  considerable
Jewish  population,  although  it  was  also  occupied  by  a  Roman
garrison.  Its  climate  and  waters  were  celebrated,  as  also  its
market-place.  It  is  specially  interesting  to  find  that  among
the  patrician  Jewish  families  belonging  to  the  laity,  who  took
.part  in  the  instrumental  music  of  the  Temple,  two — those  of
Pegarim  and  Zippariah — were  from  Emmaus,  and  also  that
the  priesthood  were  wont  to  intermarry  with  the  wealthy
Hebrews  of  that  place  (Er.  ii.  4).  Gaza,  on  whose  "desert"
road2  Philip  preached  to  and  baptized  the  Ethiopian  eunuch,
counted  not  fewer  than  eight  heathen  temples,  besides  an
idol-shrine  just  outside  the  city.  Still  Jews  were  allowed  to
reside  there,  probably  on  account  of  its  important  market.

Only  two  names  yet  remain  to  be  mentioned,  but  those  of
the  deepest  and  most  solemn  interest.  Bethlehem,  the  birth-
place of  our  Lord,  and  Jerusalem,  where  He  was  crucified.
It  deserves  notice,  that  the  answer  which  the  Sanhedrists  of
old  gave  to  the  inquiries  of  Herod  (Matt.  ii.  5)  is  equally  re-
turned in  many  Talmudical  passages,3  and  with  the  same  refer-
ence to  Micah  v.  2.  It  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  a  settled
point  that,  according  to  the  Jewish  fathers,  Messiah,  the  Son
of  David,  was  to  be  born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judah.  But  there
is  one  passage  in  the  Mishnah  which  throws  such  peculiar
light  on  the  Gospel  narrative,  that  it  will  be  best  to  give  it
in  its  entirety.  We  know  that,  on  the  night  in  which  our

1  Modern  writers  mostly  identify  it  with  the  present  Kulonieh,  colonia,  deriving
the  name  from  the  circumstance  that  it  was  colonised  by  Roman  soldiers.     Lieut.
Conder  suggests  the  modern  Khamasa>  about  eight  miles  from  Jerusalem,  as  the
site  of  Emmaus.

2  Professor  Robinson  has  given  a  most  graphic  description  of  that  desert  road.
*  Jer*  £er»  ii.  3  gives  a  most  curious  story  connected  with  this.


3o  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Saviour  was  born,  the  angels'  message  came  to  those  who
probably  alone  of  all  in  or  near  Bethlehem  were  "keeping
watch."  For,  close  by  Bethlehem,  on  the  road  to  Jerusalem,
was  a  tower,  known  as  .Migdal  Eder,  the  "watch-tower
of  the  flock."  For  here  was  the  station  where  shepherds
watched  the  flocks  destined  for  sacrifices  in  the  Temple.  So
well  known  was  this,  that  if  animals  were  found  as  far  from
Jerusalem  as  Migdal  Eder,  and  within  that  circuit  on  every
side,  the  males  were  offered  as  burnt-offerings,  the  females  as
peace-offerings.1  R.  Jehudah  adds  :  "  If  suited  for  Paschal
sacrifices,  then  they  are  Paschal  sacrifices,  provided  it  be
not  more  than  thirty  days  before  the  feast "  (Shekal.  vii.  4 ;
compare  also  Jer.  Kid.  ii.  9).  It  seems  of  deepest  signifi-
cance, almost  like  the  fulfilment  of  type,  that  those  shepherds
who  first  heard  tidings  of  the  Saviour's  birth,  who  first
listened  to  angels'  praises,  were  watching  flocks  destined
to  be  offered  as  sacrifices  in  the  Temple.  There  was  the
type,  and  here  the  reality.  At  all  times  Bethlehem  was
among  "the  least"  in  Judah— so  small  that  the  Rabbis  do
not  even  refer  to  it  in  detail.  The  small  village-inn  was  over-
crowded, and  the  guests  from  Nazareth  found  shelter  only  in
the  stable,2  whose  manger  became  the  cradle  of  the  King  of
Israel.  It  was  here  that  those  who  tended  the  sacrificial
flocks,  heaven-directed,  found  the  Divine  Babe — significantly

1  Formerly  those  who  found  such  animals  had  out  of  their  own  means  to  supply
the  necessary  drink-offerings.     But  as  this  induced  some  not  to  bring  the  animals
to  the  Temple,  it  was  afterwards  decreed  to  supply  the  cost  of  the  drink-offerings
from  the  Temple  treasury  (Shek.  vii.  5).

2  In  Echa  R.  72  a,  there  is  a  tradition  that  the  Messiah  was  to  be  born  "in
the  Castle  Arba  of  Bethlehem  Judah."     Caspari  (Chron.  Geogr.  Ant.  ii.  d.  Lebef
Jesu,  p.  $4)  quotes  this  in  confirmation  that  the  present  castellated  monastery,  ih
the  cave  of  which  is  the  traditional  site  of  our  Lord's  birth,  marks  the  real  spot
In  the  East  such  caves  were  often  used  as  stables.


In  Judcza.  81

the  first  to  see  Him,  to  believe,  and  to  adore.  But  this  is  not
all.  It  is  when  we  remember,  that  presently  these  shepherds
would  be  in  the  Temple,  and  meet  those  who  came  thither  to
worship  and  to  sacrifice,  that  we  perceive  the  full  significance
of  what  otherwise  would  have  seemed  scarcely  worth  while
noticing  in  connection  with  humble  shepherds  :  "  And  when
they  had  seen  it,  they  made  known  abroad  the  saying  which
was  told  them  concerning  this  child.  And  all  they  that  heard
it  wondered  at  those  things  which  were  told  them  by  the
shepherds"  (Luke  ii.  17,  18).  Moreover,  we  can  understand
the  wonderful  impression  made  on  those  In  the  courts  of  the
Temple,  as,  while  they  selected  their  sacrifices,  the  shepherds
told  the  devout  of  the  speedy  fulfilment  of  all  these  types  in
what  they  had  themselves  seen  and  heard  in  that  night  of
wonders  ;  how  eager,  curious  crowds  might  gather  around  to
discuss,  to  wonder,  perhaps  to  mock  ;  how  the  heart  of  "just
and  devout "  old  Simeon  would  be  gladdened  within  him,  in
expectation  of  the  near  realisation  of  a  life's  hopes  and
prayers ;  and  how  aged  Anna,  and  they  who  like  her  "  looked
for  redemption  in  Israel,"  would  lift  up  their  heads,  since  their
salvation  was  drawing  nigh.  Thus  the  shepherds  would  be
the  most  effectual  heralds  of  the  Messiah  in  the  Temple,  and
both  Simeon  and  Anna  be  prepared  for  the  time  when  the
infant  Saviour  would  be  presented  in  the  sanctuary.  But
there  is  yet  another  verse  which,  as  we  may  suggest,  would
find  a  fuller  explanation  in  the  fact  that  these  shepherds
tended  the  Temple  flocks.  When  in  Luke  ii.  20  we  read  that
"  the  shepherds  returned,  glorifying  and  praising  God,"  the
meaning  in  that  connection1  seems  somewhat  difficult  till  we

1  Compare  here  verses  17,  1 8,  which  in  point  of  time  precede  verse  20.    The  term
rendered  in  the  Authorised  Version  "make  known  abroad,"  and  by

G


82  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

realise  that,  after  bringing  their  flocks  to  the  Temple,  they
would  return  to  their  own  homes,  and  carry  with  them,  joyfully
and  gratefully,  tidings  of  the  great  salvation.  Lastly,  without
entering  into  controversy,  the  passage  from  the  Mishnah  above
quoted  in  great  measure  disposes  of  the  objection  against  the
traditional  date  of  our  Lord's  birth,  derived  from  the  sup-
posed fact,  that  the  rains  of  December  would  prevent  the
flocks  being  kept  all  night  "  in  the  field."  For,  in  the  first
place,  these  were  flocks  on  their  way  to  Jerusalem,  and
not  regularly  pasturing  in  the  open  at  that  season.  And,
secondly,  the  Mishnah  evidently  contemplates  their  being
thus  in  the  open  thirty  days  before  the  Passover,  or  in  the
month  of  February,  during  which  the  average  rainfall  is  quite
the  largest  in  the  year.1

"Ten  measures  of  beauty,"  say  the  Rabbis,  "hath  God
bestowed  upon  the  world,  and  nine  of  these  fall  to  the  lot  of
Jerusalem  " — and  again,  "  A  city,  the  fame  of  which  has  gone
out  from  one  end  of  the  world  to  the  other."2  "Thine,  O
Lord,  is  the  greatness,  the  power,  the  glory,  and  eternity."
This — explains  the  Talmud — "  is  Jerusalem."  In  opposition
to  her  rival  Alexandria,  which  was  designated  "  the  little,"
Jerusalem  was  called  "the  great."  It  almost  reminds  one  of
the  title  "eternal  city,"  given  to  Rome,  when  we  find  the
Rabbis  speaking  of  Jerusalem  as  the  "  eternal  house."
Similarly,  if  a  common  proverb  has  it,  that  "  all  roads  lead  to
Rome,"  it  was  a  Jewish  saying,  "  All  coins  come  from  Jeru-

Wahl  "  ultra  citroque  narro"  does  not  seem  exhausted  by  the  idea  of  conversation
with  the  party  in  the  ''stable,"  or  with  any  whom  they  might  meet  in  "  the  field."

1  The  average  rainfall  in  Jerusalem  for  eight  years  amounts  to  fourteen  inches
in  December,  thirteen  in  January,  and  sixteen  in  February  (Barclay,  City  of  the
Great  King,  p.  428).  Compare  Hamburger,  u.s.  passim.

•  Ber.  38.


In  Judcza.  83

salem."  This  is  not  the  place  to  describe  the  city  in  its
appearance  and  glory.1  But  one  almost  feels  as  if,  on  such  a
subject,  one  could  understand,  if  not  condone,  the  manifest
exaggerations  of  the  Rabbis.  Indeed,  there  are  indications
that  they  scarcely  expected  their  statements  to  be  taken
literally.  Thus,  when  the  number  of  its  synagogues  is  men-
tioned as  460  or  480,  it  is  explained  that  the  latter  number  is
the  numerical  equivalent  of  the  word  "full"  in  Isa.  i.  21  ("it
was  full  of  judgment").  It  is  more  interesting  to  know,  that
we  find  in  the  Talmud  express  mention  of  "  the  Synagogue
of  the  Alexandrians,"  referred  to  in  Acts  vi.  9 — another  im-
portant confirmation,  if  such  were  needed,  of  the  accuracy  of
St.  Luke's  narratives.  Of  the  hospitality  of  the  inhabitants
of  Jerusalem  accounts  are  given,  which  we  can  scarcely  regard
as  much  exaggerated  ;  for  the  city  was  not  reckoned  to
belong  to  any  tribe  in  particular  ;  it  was  to  be  considered
as  equally  the  home  of  all.  Its  houses  were  to  be  neither
hired  nor  let,  but  freely  thrown  open  to  every  brother.  Nor
did  any  one  among  the  countless  thousands  who  thronged  it
at  feast-times  ever  lack  room.  A  curtain  hung  before  the
entrance  of  a  house  intimated,  that  there  was  still  room  for
guests  ;  a  table  spread  in  front  of  it,  that  its  board  was  still
at  their  disposal.  And,  if  it  was  impossible  to  accommodate
within  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  proper  the  vast  crowds  which
resorted  to  the  city,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  for  sacred
purposes  Bethany  and  Bethphage  were  reckoned  as  within  the
circle  of  Jerusalem.  It  calls  forth  peculiar  sensations,  when  we
read  in  these  Jewish  records  of  Bethany  and  Bethphage  as
specially  celebrated  for  their  hospitality  to  pilgrim-guests,

1  For  this  compare  the  two  first  chapters  of  my  volume  on  The  Temple:  its
Ministry  and  Services.


84  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

for  it  wakes  the  sacred  memories  of  our  Lord's  sojourn
with  the  holy  family  of  Bethany,  and  especially  of  His  last
stay  there  and  of  His  royal  entrance  into  Jerusalem.

In  truth,  every  effort  was  used  to  make  Jerusalem  truly  a
city  of  delight.  Its  police  and  sanitary  regulations  were
more  perfect  than  in  any  modern  city ;  the  arrangements
such  as  to  keep  the  pilgrim  free  to  give  his  heart  and  mind
to  sacred  subjects.  If,  after  all,  "  the  townspeople/'  as  they
were  called,  were  regarded  as  somewhat  proud  and  super-
cilious, it  was  something  to  be  a  citizen  of  Jerushalaimah,  as
the  Jerusalemites  preferred  to  write  its  name.  Their  constant
intercourse  with  strangers  gave  them  a  knowledge  of  men
and  of  the  world.  The  smartness  and  cleverness  of  the  young
people  formed  a  theme  of  admiration  to  their  more  shy  and
awkward  country  relatives.  There  was  also  a  grandeur  in
their  bearing — almost  luxury ;  and  an  amount  of  delicacy,
tact,  and  tenderness,  which  appeared  in  all  their  public
dealings.  Among  a  people  whose  wit  and  cleverness  are
proverbial,  it  was  no  mean  praise  to  be  renowned  for  these
qualities.  In  short,  Jerusalem  was  the  ideal  of  the  Jew,  in
whatever  land  of  exile  he  might  tarry.  Her  rich  men  would
lavish  fortunes  on  the  support  of  Jewish  learning,  the  promotion
of  piety,  or  the  support  of  the  national  cause.  Thus  one  of
them  would,  when  he  found  the  price  of  sacrifices  exceedingly
high,  introduce  into  the  Temple-court  the  requisite  animals
at  his  own  cost,  to  render  the  service  possible  for  the  poor.
Or  on  another  occasion  he  would  offer  to  furnish  the  city  for
twenty-one  months  with  certain  provisions  in  her  struggle
against  Rome.  In  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  men  from  the
most  distant  countries  met,  speaking  every  variety  of  language
and  dialect.  Jews  and  Greeks,  Roman  soldiers  and  Galilean


In  Judcza.  85

peasants,  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  and  white-robed  Essenes,
busy  merchants  and  students  of  abstruse  theology,  mingled,
a  motley  crowd,  in  the  narrow  streets  of  the  city  of  palaces.
But  over  all  the  Temple,  rising  above  the  city,  seemed  to
fling  its  shadow  and  its  glory.  Each  morning  the  threefold
blast  of  the  priests'  trumpets  wakened  the  city  with  a  call
to  prayer ;  each  evening  the  same  blasts  closed  the  working
day,  as  with  sounds  from  heaven.  Turn  where  you  might,
everywhere  the  holy  buildings  were  in  view,  now  with  the
smoke  of  sacrifices  curling  over  the  courts,  or  again  with
solemn  stillness  resting  upon  the  sacred  halls.  It  was  the
Temple  which  gave  its  character  to  Jerusalem,  and  which
decided  its  fate.  There  is  a  remarkable  passage  in  the
Talmud,  which,  remembering  that  the  time  to  which  it  refers
was  in  all  probability  the  very  year  in  which  our  Lord  died
on  the  cross,  reads  like  an  unwilling  confirmation  of  the
Gospel  narrative  :  "  Forty  years  before  the  destruction  of  the
Temple,  its  doors  opened  of  their  own  accord.  Jochanan,1
the  son  of  Saccai,  rebuked  them,  saying :  O  Temple,  why
openest  thou  of  thine  own  accord  ?  Ah !  I  perceive  that
thine  end  is  at  hand ;  for  it  is  written  (Zech.  xi.  i) :  '  Open
thy  doors,  O  Lebanon,  that  the  fire  may  devour  thy  cedars ' '
(Yoma  39  b).  "And,  behold,  the  veil  of  the  Temple  was
rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  5 1)
— blessed  be  God,  not  merely  in  announcement  of  coming
judgment,  but  henceforth  to  lay  open  unto  all  the  way  into
the  Holiest  of  All.

1  Caspar!  suggests  that  this  was  the  same  as  the  high-priest  Annas,  the  name
having  only  the  syllable  indicating  the  name  of  Jehovah  prefixed.


CHAPTER    VI.

JEWISH  HOMES.

IT  may  be  safely  asserted,  that  the  grand  distinction,  which
divided  all  mankind  into  Jews  and  Gentiles,  was  not  only
religious,  but  also  social.  However  near  the  cities  of  the
heathen  to  those  of  Israel,  however  frequent  and  close  the
intercourse  between  the  two  parties,  no  one  could  have
entered  a  Jewish  town  or  village  without  feeling,  so  to  speak,
in  quite  another  world.  The  aspect  of  the  streets,  the  build-
ing and  arrangement  of  the  houses,  the  municipal  and  religious
rule,  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  people,  their  habits  and
ways — above  all,  the  family  life,  stood  in  marked  contrast  to
what  would  be  seen  elsewhere.  On  every  side  there  was  evi-
dence that  religion  here  was  not  merely  a  creed,  nor  a  set  of
observances,  but  that  it  pervaded  every  relationship,  and
dominated  every  phase  of  life.

Let  us  imagine  a  real  Jewish  town  or  village.  There
were  many  such,  for  Palestine  had  at  all  times  a  far  larger
number  of  towns  and  villages  than  might  have  been  expected
from  its  size,  or  from  the  general  agricultural  pursuits  of  its
inhabitants.  Even  at  the  time  of  its  first  occupation  under
Joshua  we  find  somewhere  about  six  hundred  towns — if  we


Jewish  Homes.  87

may  judge  by  the  Levitical  cities,  of  about  an  average  circum-
ference of  two  thousand  cubits  on  each  side,  and  with  pro-
bably an  average  population  of  from  two  to  three  thousand.1
But  the  number  of  towns  and  villages,  as  well  as  their  popu-
lousness,  greatly  increased  in  later  times.  Thus  Josephus
(Life,  45)  speaks  of  not  fewer  than  two  hundred  and  forty
townships  in  Galilee  alone  in  his  days.  This  progress  was,
no  doubt,  due  not  only  to  the  rapid  development  of  society,
but  also  to  the  love  of  building  that  characterised  Herod  and
his  family,  and  to  which  so  many  fortresses,  palaces,  temples,
and  towns  owed  their  origin.  Alike  the  New  Testament,
Josephus,  and  the  Rabbis  give  us  three  names,  which  may  be
rendered  by  villages,  townships,  and  towns — the  latter  being
surrounded  by  walls,  and  again  distinguished  into  those  forti-
fied already  at  the  time  of  Joshua,  and  those  of  later  date.  A
township  might  be  either  "  great,"  if  it  had  its  synagogue,  or
small,  if  it  wanted  such  ;  this  being  dependent  on  the  residence
of  at  least  ten  men,  who  could  always  be  reckoned  upon  to  form
a  quorum  for  the  worship  of  the  synagogue  (the  so-called  Bat-
lanin2);  for  service  could  not  be  celebrated  with  any  less  number
of  males.  The  villages  had  no  synagogue  ;  but  their  inhabit-
ants were  supposed  to  go  to  the  nearest  township  for  market  on
the  Monday  and  Thursday  of  every  week,  when  service  was
held  for  them,  and  the  local  Sanhedrim  also  sat  (Megill.  i.  1-3).
A  very  curious  law  provided  (Cheth.  1 10),  that  a  man  could
not  oblige  his  wife  to  follow  him  if  he  moved  either  from  a
township  to  a  town,  or  the  reverse.  The  reason  of  the  former
provision  was,  that  in  a  town  people  lived  together,  and

J  Saalschiitz,  ArcJueoL  d.  Hebr.  ii.  pp.  250,  251.

2  From  "betal,"  to  cease— as  the  glossary  to  Baba  B.  82  a  explains:  men
without  reproach,  who  gave  up  their  work  to  give  themselves  wholly  to  the  work
of  the  synagogue.  Such  had  a  claim  to  support  from  the  synagogue  revenues.


88  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

the  houses  were  close  to  each  other ;  hence  there  was  a  want
of  fresh,  free  air,  and  of  gardens,  which  were  enjoyed  in
townships.  On  the  other  hand,  a  woman  might  object  to
exchange  residence  in  a  town  for  one  in  a  township,  be-
cause in  a  town  everything  was  to  be  got,  and  people  met  in
.the  streets  and  market-place  from  all  the  neighbourhood.

Statements  like  these  will  give  some  idea  of  the  difference
between  town  and  country  life.  Let  us  first  think  of  the
former.  Approaching  one  of  the  ancient  fortified  towns,  one
would  come  to  a  low  wall  that  protected  a  ditch.  Crossing
this  moat,  one  would  be  at  the  city  wall  proper,  and  enter
through  a  massive  gate,  often  covered  with  iron,  and  secured
by  strong  bars  and  bolts.  Above  the  gate  rose  the  watch-
tower.  "Within  the  gate"  was  the  shady  or  sheltered
retreat  where  "  the  elders  "  sat.  Here  grave  citizens  discussed
public  affairs  or  the  news  of  the  day,  or  transacted  important
business.  The  gates  opened  upon  large  squares,  on  which
the  various  streets  converged.  Here  was  the  busy  scene  of
intercourse  and  trade.  The  country-people  stood  or  moved
about,  hawking  the  produce  of  field,  orchard,  and  dairy ;  the
foreign  merchant  or  pedlar  exposed  his  wares,  recommending
the  newest  fashions  from  Rome  or  Alexandria,  the  latest
luxuries  from  the  far  East,  or  the  art  produce  of  the  gold-
smith and  the  modeller  at  Jerusalem,  while  among  them
moved  the  crowd,  idle  or  busy,  chattering,  chaffing,  good-
humoured,  and  bandying  witticisms.  Now  they  give  way
respectfully  before  a  Pharisee  ;  or  their  conversation  is  hushed
by  the  weird  appearance  of  an  Essene  or  of  some  sectary —
political  or  religious, — while  low,  muttered  curses  attend  the
stealthy  steps  of  the  publican,  whose  restless  eyes  wander
around  to  watch  that  nothing  escape  the  close  meshes  of  the


Jewish  Homes.  89

tax-gatherer's  net  These  streets  are  all  named,  mostiy  after
the  trades  or  guilds  which  have  there  their  bazaars.  |*  For  a
guild  always  keeps  together,  whether  in  street  or  synagogue.
In  Alexandria  the  different  trades  sat  in  the  synagogue
arranged  into  guilds ;  and  St.  Paul  could  have  no  difficulty  in
meeting  in  the  bazaar  of  his  trade  with  the  like-minded
Aquila  and  Priscilla  (Acts  xviii.  2,  3),  with  whom  to  find  a
lodging.  In  these  bazaars  many  of  the  workmen  sat  out-
side their  shops,  and,  in  the  interval  of  labour,  exchanged
greetings  or  banter  with  the  passers-by.  For  all  Israel  are
brethren,  and  there  is  a  sort  of  freemasonry  even  in  the
Jewish  mode  of  salutation,  which  always  embodied  either  an
acknowledgment  of  the  God  of  Israel,  or  a  brotherly  wish  of
peace.  Excitable,  impulsive,  quick,  sharp-witted,  imaginative;
fond  of  parable,  pithy  sayings,  acute  distinctions,  or  pungent
wit ;  reverent  towards  God  and  man,  respectful  in  the  pre-
sence of  age,  enthusiastic  of  learning  and  of  superior  mental
endowments,  most  delicately  sensitive  in  regard  to  the  feelings
of  others ;  zealous,  with  intensely  warm  Eastern  natures,
ready  to  have  each  prejudice  aroused,  hasty  and  violent
in  passion,  but  quickly  assuaged  —  such  is  the-  motley
throng  around.  And  now,  perhaps,  the  voice  of  a  Rabbi,
teaching  in  some  shady  retreat — although  latterly  Jewish
pride  of  learning  forbade  the  profanation  of  lore  by  popular-
ising it  for  the  "  unlearned  " — or,  better  far,  at  one  time  the
presence  of  the  Master,  gathers  and  keeps  them  spell-bound,
forgetful  alike  of  the  cravings  of  hunger  and  of  the  lapse  of
time,  till,  the  short  Eastern  day  ended,  the  stars  shining  out
on  the  deep  blue  sky  must  have  reminded  many  among  them
of  the  promise  to  their  father  Abraham,  now  fulfilled  in  One
greater  than  Abraham.


90  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

'  Back  to  the  town  in  the  cool  of  even  to  listen  to  the  deli-
cious murmur  of  well  or  fountain,  as  those  crowd  around  it  who
have  not  cisterns  in  their  own  houses.  The  watchman  is  on
the  top  of  the  tower  above  the  gateway ;  presently,  night-
watchers  will  patrol  the  streets.  Nor  is  there  absolute  dark-
ness, for  it  is  customary  to  keep  a  light  burning  all  night  in
the  house,  and  the  windows  (unlike  those  of  modern  Eastern
dwellings)  open  chiefly  on  street  and  road.  Those  large  win-
dows are  called  Tyrian,  the  smaller  ones  Egyptian.  They
are  not  filled  in  with  glass,  but  contain  gratings  or  lattices.
In  the  houses  of  the  rich  the  window-frames  are  elaborately
carved,  and  richly  inlaid.  Generally  the  woodwork  is  of  the
common  sycamore,  sometimes  of  olive  or  cedar,  and  in
palaces  even  of  Indian  sandal-wood.  The  entablature  is  more
or  less  curiously  carved  and  ornamented.  Only  there  must  be
no  representation  of  anything  in  heaven  or  on  earthTj  So  deep
was  the  feeling  on  this  point,  that  even  the  attempt  of  Pilate
to  introduce  by  night  into  Jerusalem  the  effigies  of  Caesar  on
the  top  of  the  Roman  standards  led  to  scenes  in  which  the
Jews  showed  themselves  willing  to  die  for  their  convictions
(Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  3,  i) ;  while  the  palace  of  Herod  Antipas  at
Tiberias  was  burned  by  the  mob  because  it  was  decorated
with  figures  of  animals  (Jos.  Life,  12).  These  extreme  views,
however,  gave  way,  first,  before  the  tolerant  example  of
Gamaliel,  the  teacher  of  Paul,  who  made  use  of  a  public
bath,  although  adorned  by  a  statue  of  Venus,  since,  as  he
put  it,  the  statue  was  intended  for  the  embellishment  of  the
bath,  and  not  the  bath  for  the  sake  of  the  statue.  If  this
argument  reminds  us  that  Gamaliel  was  not  a  stranger
to  Christianity,  the  statement  of  his  grandson,  that  an
idol  was  nothing  if  its  worship  had  been  disclaimed  by  the


Jewish  Homes.  91

heathen  (Ab.  Sar.  52),  recalls  still  more  strongly  the  teach-
ing of  St.  Paul.  And  so  we  gradually  come  down  to  the
modern  orthodox  doctrine,  which  allows  the  representation
of  plants,  animals,  etc.,  but  prohibits  that  of  sun,  moon,
and  stars,  except  for  purposes  of  study,  while,  though  doubt-
fully, it  admits  those  of  men  and  even  angels,  provided
they  be  in  sunken,  not  in  raised  workmanship.

The  rule  of  these  towns  and  villages  was  exceedingly  strict.
The  representatives  of  Rome  were  chiefly  either  military  men,
or  else  fiscal  or  political  agents.  We  have,  indeed,  a  notice
that  the  Roman  general  Gabinius,  about  half  a  century  before
Christ,  divided  Palestine  for  juridical  purposes  into  five  dis-
tricts, each  presided  over  by  a  council  (Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  5,  4) ;
but  that  arrangement  was  only  of  very  short  duration,  and
even  while  it  lasted  these  councils  seem  to  have  been  Jewish.
Then  every  town  had  its  Sanhedrim,1  consisting  of  twenty-
three  members  if  the  place  numbered  at  least  one  hundred
and  twenty  men,  or  of  three  members  if  the  population  were
smaller.2  These  Sanhedrists  were  appointed  directly  by  the
supreme  authority,  or  Great  Sanhedrim,  "the  council,"  at
Jerusalem,  which  consisted  of  seventy-one  members.  It  is
difficult  to  fix  the  limits  of  the  actual  power  wielded  by  these
Sanhedrims  in  criminal  cases.  But  the  smaller  Sanhedrims

1  The  name  "  Sanhedrin,"  or  "  Sunedrion, "  is  undoubtedly  of  Greek  deriva-
tion, although   the  Rabbis  have  tried  to    paraphrase    it  as   "Sin"  (=  Sinai)
"haderin,"  those  who  repeater  explain  the  law,  or  to  trace  its  etymology,  as
being  "  those  who  hate  to  accept  the  persons  of  men  in  judgment"  (the  name  being
supposed  to  be  composed  of  the  Hebrew  equivalents  of  the  words  italicised).

2  An  ingenious  attempt  has  lately  been  made  to  show  that  the  Sanhedrim  of
three  members  was  not  a  regular  court,  but  only  arbitrators  chosen  by  the  parties
themselves  (see  Schiirer,  Neutest.  Zeitgesch.  p.  403).     But  the  argument,  so  far  as
it  tries  to  prove  that  such  was  always  the  case,  seems  to  me  not  to  meet  all  the  facts.


92  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

are  referred  to  in  such  passages  as  Matt.  v.  22,  23  ;  x.  17;
Mark  xiii.  9.  Of  course  all  ecclesiastical  and,  so  to  speak,
strictly  Jewish  causes,  and  all  religious  questions  were  within
their  special  cognisance.  Lastly,  there  were  also  in  every
place  what  we  may  call  municipal  authorities,  under  the  pre-
sidency of  a  mayor — the  representatives  of  the  "  elders  " — an
institution  so  frequently  mentioned  in  Scripture,  and  deeply
rooted  in  Jewish  society.  Perhaps  these  may  be  referred
to  in  Luke  vii.  3,  as  sent  by  the  centurion  of  Capernaum  to
intercede  for  him  with  the  Lord.

What  may  be  called  the  police  and  sanitary  regulations
were  of  the  strictest  character.  Of  Caesarea,  for  example,  we
know  that  there  was  a  regular  system  of  drainage  into  the
sea,  apparently  similar  to,  but  more  perfect  than  that  of  any
modern  town  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  9,  6).  The  same  holds  true  in
regard  to  the  Temple-buildings  at  Jerusalem.  But]  in  every
town  and  village  sanitary  rules  were  strictly  attended  to.
Cemeteries,  tanneries,  and  whatever  also  might  be  prejudicial
to  health,  had  to  be  removed  at  least  fifty  cubits  outside  a,
town.1  Bakers'  and  dyers'  shops,  or  stables,  were  not  allowed
under  the  dwelling  of  another  person.  Again,  the  line  of
each  street  had  to  be  strictly  kept  in  building,  nor  was  even
a  projection  beyond  it  allowed.  In  general  the  streets  were
wider  than  those  of  modern  Eastern  cities.  The  nature  of  the
soil,  and  the  circumstance  that  so  many  towns  were  built  on
hills  (at  least  in  Judaea),  would,  of  course,  be  advantageous  in
a  sanitary  point  of  view.  It  would  also  render  the  paving  of
the  streets  less  requisite.  But  we  know  that  certain  towns  were
paved — Jerusalem  with  white  stones  (Jos.  Ant.  xx.  9,  7).  To

i  See  these  and  similar  regulations  chiefly  in  Mishnah  (Baba  B.  i.   and  ii.
passim}.


Jewish  Homes.  93

obviate  occasions  of  dispute,  neighbours  were  not  allowed  to
have  windows  looking  into  the  courts  or  rooms  of  others,  nor
might  the  principal  entrance  to  a  shop  be  through  a  court
cpmmon  to  two  or  three  dwellings.  \

These  brief  notices  may  help  us  better  to  realise  the
surroundings  of  Jewish  town  life.  Looking  up  and  down  one
of  the  streets  of  a  town  in  Galilee  or  Judaea,  the  houses  would
be  seen  to  differ  in  size  and  in  elegance,  from  the  small
cottage,  only  eight  or  ten  yards  square,  to  the  mansions  of
the  rich,  sometimes  two  or  more  stories  high,  and  embellished
by  rows  of  pillars  and  architectural  adornments.  Suppose
ourselves  in  front  of  a  better-class  dwelling,  though  not
exactly  that  of  a  patrician,  for  it  is  built  of  brick,  or  perhaps
of  undressed,  or  even  of  dressed  stone,  but  not  of  marble,  nor
yet  of  hewn  stone ;  nor  are  its  walls  painted  with  such  delicate
colours  as  vermilion,  but  simply  whitewashed,  or,  may  be,
covered  with  some  neutral  tint,  A  wide,  sometimes  costly,
stair  leads  from  the  outside  straight  up  to  the  flat  roof,  which
is  made  to  slope  a  little  downwards,  so  as  to  allow  the  rain-
water easily  to  flow  through  pipes  into  the  cistern  below.
The  roof  is  paved  with  brick,  stone,  or  other  hard  substance,
and  surrounded  by  a  balustrade,  which,  according  to  Jewish
law,  must  be  at  least  two  cubits  (three  feet)  high,  and  strong
enough  to  bear  the  weight  of  a  person.  Police-regulations,
conceived  in  the  same  spirit  of  carefulness,  prohibited  open
wells  and  pits,  insufficient  ladders,  rickety  stairs,  even
dangerous  dogs  about  a  house.  From  roof  to  roof  there
might  be  a  regular  communication,  called  by  the  Rabbis  "the
road  of  the  roofs "  (Baba  Mez.  88  b}.  Thus  a  person  could
make  his  escape,  passing  from  roof  to  roof,  till  at  the  last
house  he  would  descend  the  stairs  that  led  down  its  outside,


94  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

without  having  entered  any  dwelling.  \  To  this  "road  of  the
roofs"  our  Lord  no  doubt  referred  in  His  warning  to  His
followers  (Matt.  xxiv.  17;  Mark  xiii.  15;  Luke  xvii.  31),
intended  to  apply  to  the  last  siege  of  Jerusalem :  "  And  let
him  that  is  on  the  housetop  not  go  down  into  the  house,
neither  enter  therein."  '  For  ordinary  intercourse  the  roof
was  the  coolest,  the  airiest,  the  stillest  place.  Of  course,  at
times  it  would  be  used  for  purposes  of  domestic  economy.
But  thither  a  man  would  retire  in  preference  for  prayer  or
quiet  thinking ;  here  he  would  watch,  and  wait,  and  observe
whether  friend  or  foe,  the  gathering  of  the  storm,  or — as  the
priest  stationed  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  Temple  before  the
morning  sacrifice — how  the  red  and  golden  light  of  dawn
spread  along  the  edge  of  the  horizon.  From  the  roof,  also,  it
was  easy  to  protect  oneself  against  enemies,  or  to  carry  on
dangerous  fight  with  those  beneath  ;  and  assuredly,  if  any-
where, it  was  "  on  the  housetops "  where  secrets  might  be
whispered,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  most  public  "  proclama-
tion "  of  them  be  made  (Matt.  x.  27  ;  Luke  xii.  3).  The
stranger's  room  was  generally  built  on  the  roof,  in  order  that,
undisturbed  by  the  household,  the  guest  might  go  out  and
come  in  ;  and  here,  at  the  feast  of  Tabernacles,  for  cool-
ness and  convenience,  the  leafy  "  booths  "  were  often  reared,
in  which  Israel  dwelt  in  memory  of  their  pilgrimage.  Close
by  was  "  the  upper  chamber."  On  the  roof  the  family
would  gather  for  converse,  or  else  in  the  court  beneath — with
its  trees  spreading  grateful  shade,  and  the  music  of  its
plashing  fountain  falling  soothingly  on  the  ear,  as  you  stood
in  the  covered  gallery  that  ran  all  around,  and  opened  on  the
apartments  of  the  household,  t
\  If  the  guest-chamber  on  the  roof,  which  could  be  reached


Jewish  Homes.  95

from  the  outside,  without  passing  through  the  house,  reminds
us  of  Elisha  and  the  Shunammite,  and  of  the  last  Passover-
supper,  to  which  the  Lord  and  His  disciples  could  go,  and
which  they  could  leave,  without  coming  in  contact  with  any
in  the  house,  the  gallery  that  ran  round  the  court  under  the
roof  recalls  yet  another  most  solemn  scene.  We  remember
how  they  who  bore  the  man  "  sick  of  the  palsy,"  when  unable
to  "come  nigh  unto  Jesus  for  the  press,"  "uncovered  the
roof  where  He  was,"  "  and  let  him  ,down  through  the  tiling
with  his  couch  into  the  midst  before  Jesus "  (Mark  ii.  4 ;
Luke  v.  19).  We  know,  from  many  Talmudical  passages,
that  the  Rabbis  resorted  in  preference  to  "  the  upper  room  "
when  discussing  religious  questions.  It  may  have  been  so  in
this  instance ;  and,  unable  to  gain  access  through  the  door
which  led  into  the  upper  room,  the  bearers  of  the  sick  may
have  broken  down  the  ceiling  from  the  roof.  Or,  judging  it
more  likely  that  the  attendant  multitude  thronged  the  court
beneath,  while  Jesus  stood  in  the  gallery  that  ran  round  the
court  and  opened  into  the  various  apartments,  they  might
have  broken  down  the  roof  above  Him,  and  so  slowly  let
down  their  burden  at  His  feet,  and  in  sight  of  them  all.
There  is  a  significant  parallelism,  or  rather  contrast,  to  this
in  a  Rabbinical  story  (Hoed  K.  25  a),  which  relates  how,
when  the  bier  on  which  a  celebrated  teacher  was  laid  could
not  be  passed  out  at  the  door,  they  carried  up  their  burden
and  let  it  down  from  the  roof — on  its  way,  not  to  a  new  life,
but  to  burial.  Otherwise,  there  was  also  a  stair  which  led
from  the  roof  into  the  court  and  house.  Approaching  a
house,  as  visitors  ordinarily  would  do,  from  the  street,  you
would  either  pass  through  a  large  outer  court,  or  else  come
straight  to  the  vestibule  or  porch.  Here  the  door  opened


96  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

into  the  inner  court,  which  sometimes  was  shared  by  several
families.  |  A  porter  opened  to  callers  on  mentioning  their
names,  as  did  Rhoda  to  Peter  on  the  eventful  night  of  his
miraculous  deliverance  from  prison  (Acts  xii.  13,  14).  Our
Lord  also  applies  this  well-known  fact  of  domestic  life,  when
He  says  (Rev.  iii.  20),  "Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,  and
knock  :  if  any  man  hear  My  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will
come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me."
/  Passing  through  this  inner  court,  and  through  the  gallery,
you  would  reach  the  various  rooms — the  family  room,  the
reception  room,  and  the  sleeping  apartments — the  most
retired  being  occupied  by  the  ladies,  and  the  inner  rooms
used  chiefly  in  winter.  The  furniture  was  much  the  same  as
that  now  in  use,  consisting  of  tables,  couches,  chairs,  candle-
sticks, and  lamps,  varying  in  costliness  according  to  the  rank
and  wealth  of  the  family.  Among  articles  of  luxury  we
mention  rich  cushions  for  the  head  and  arms,  ornaments,  and
sometimes  even  pictures.  The  doors,  which  moved  on  hinges
fastened  with  wooden  pins,  were  barred  by  wooden  bolts,
which  could  be  withdrawn  by  check  keys  from  the  outside.
The  dining  apartment  was  generally  spacious,  and  sometimes
employed  for  meetings,  f

We  have  been  describing  the  arrangements  and  the  ap-
pearance of  towns  and  dwellings  in  Palestine.  But  it  is  not
any  of  these  outward  things  which  gives  a  real  picture  of  a
Jewish  home.  Within,  everything  was  quite  peculiar.  At
the  outset,  the  rite  of  circumcision  separated  the  Jew  from
the  nations  around,  and  dedicated  him  to  God.  Private
prayer,  morning  and  evening,  hallowed  daily  life,  and  family
religion  pervaded  the  home.  Before  every  meal  they  washed
and  prayed  ;  after  it  they  "  gave  thanks."  Besides,  there


Jewish  Homes.  97

were  what  may  be  designated  as  specially  family  feasts.
The  return  of  the  Sabbath  sanctified  the  week  of  labour.  It
was  to  be  welcomed  as  a  king,  or  with  songs  as  a  bride-
groom ;  and  each  household  observed  it  as  a  season  of  sacred
rest  and  of  joy.  True,  Rabbinism  made  all  this  a  matter  of
mere  externalism,  converting  it  into  an  unbearable  burden,
by  endless  injunctions  of  what  constituted  work  and  of
that  which  was  supposed  to  produce  joy,  thereby  utterly
changing  its  sacred  character.  Still,  the  fundamental  idea
remained,  like  a  broken  pillar  that  shows  where  the  palace
had  stood,  and  what  had  been  its  noble  proportions.  As  the
head  of  the  house  returned  on  the  Sabbath-eve  from  the
synagogue  to  his  home,  he  found  it  festively  adorned,  the
Sabbath  lamp  brightly  burning,  and  the  table  spread  with
the  richest  each  household  could  afford.  But  first  he
blessed  each  child  with  the  blessing  of  Israel.  And
next  evening,  when  the  Sabbath  light  faded  out,  he  made
solemn  "separation"  between  the  hallowed  day  and  the
working  week,  and  so  commenced  his  labour  once  more  in
the  name  of  the  Lord.  Nor  were  the  stranger,  the  poor,  the
widow,  or  the  fatherless  forgotten.  How  fully  they  were
provided  for,  how  each  shared  in  what  was  to  be  considered
not  a  burden  but  a  privilege,  and  with  what  delicacy  relief
was  administered — for  all  Israel  were  brethren,  and  fellow-
citizens  of  their  Jerusalem — those  know  best  who  have  closely
studied  Jewish  life,  its  ordinances  and  practices. l

But  this  also  is  rather  a  sketch  of  religious  than  of  family
life.  At  the  outset,  we  should  here  say,  that  even  the

1  The  reader  must  remember  that  these  are  but  "sketches."  A  full  elabora-
tion of  all  these  subjects,  in  their  various  bearings,  must  be  reserved  for  a
larger  work,


98  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Hebrew  name  for  "woman,"  given  her  at  her  creation
(Gen.  ii.  23),  marked  a  wife  as  the  companion  of  her  husband,^
and  his  equal  ("  Ishah,"  a  woman,  from  "  Ish,"  a  man).  But
it  is  when  we  consider  the  relations  between  man  and  wife,
children  and  parents,  the  young  and  the  aged,  that  the  vast
difference  between  Judaism  and  heathenism  so  strikingly
appears.  Even  the  relationship  in  which  God  presented
Himself  to  His  people,  as  their  Father,  would  give  peculiar
strength  and  sacredness  to  the  bond  which  connected  earthly
parents  with  their  offspring.  Here  it  should  be  borne  in
mind  that,  so  to  speak,  the  whole  purpose  of  Israel  as  a
nation,  with  a  view  to  the  appearance  of  the  Messiah  from
among  them,  made  it  to  each  household  a  matter  of  deepest
interest  that  no  light  in  Israel  should  be  extinguished  through
want  of  succession.  Hence,  such  an  expression  as  (Jer.  xxii.
10),  "  Weep  sore  for  him  that  goeth  away :  for  he  shall
return  no  more,"  was  applied  to  those  who  died  childless
(Moed  K.  27).  Similarly,  it  was  said  that  he  who  had  no
child  was  like  one  dead.  Proverbial  expressions  in  regard  to
the  "  parental  relation  "  occur  in  Rabbinical  writings,  which
in  their  higher  application  remind  us  that  the  New  Testament
writers  were  Jews.  If,  in  the  impassioned  strain  of  happy
assurance  concerning  our  Christian  safety,  we  are  told
(Rom.  viii.  33),  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of
God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth,"  we  may  believe  that
St.  Paul  was  familiar  with  a  saying  like  this :  "  Shall  a
father  bear  witness  against  his  son?"  (Abod  S.  3).  The,
somewhat  similar  question,  "  Is  there  a  father  who  hateth  his
own  son  ?"  may  recall  to  our  minds  the  comfort  which  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ministers  to  those  who  are  in  suffering
(Heb.  xii.  7),  "If  ye  endure  chastening,  God  dealeth  with


Jewish  Homes.  99

you   as   with  sons ;   for   what  son   is   he   whom   the   father
chasteneth  not  ?"

Speaking  of  the  relation  between  parents  and  children,  it
may  be  safely  asserted,  that  no  crime  was  more  severely
v*  reprobated  than  any  breach  of  the  fifth  commandment.  The
Talmud,  with  its  usual  punctiliousness,  enters  into  details,
when  it  lays  down  as  a  rule  that  "  a  son  is  bound  to  feed  his
father,  to  give  him  drink,  to  clothe  him,  to  protect  him,  to
lead  him  in,  and  to  conduct  him  out,  and  to  wash  his  face,
his  hands,  and  his  feet ;"  to  which  the  Jerusalem  Gemara
adds,  that  a  son  is  even  bound  to  beg  for  his  father —
although  here  also  Rabbinism  would  give  preference  to  a
spiritual  before  a  natural  parent,  or  rather  to  one  who  teaches
the  law  before  a  father !  The  general  state  of  Jewish  society
shows  us  parents  as  fondly  watching  over  their  children,  and
children  as  requiting  their  care  by  bearing  with  the  foibles,
and  even  the  trials,  arising  from  the  caprices  of  old  age  and
infirmity.  Such  things  as  undutifulness,  or  want  of  loving
consideration  for  parents,  would  have  wakened  a  thrill  of
horror  in  Jewish  society.  As  for  crimes  against  parents,
which  the  law  of  God  visited  with  the  utmost  penalty,  they
seem  happily  to  have  been  almost  unknown.  The  Rabbinical
ordinances,  however,  also  specified  the  obligation  of  parents,
and  limited  their  power.  Thus  a  son  was  considered  inde-
pendent whenever  he  could  gain  his  own  living  ;  and,  although
a  daughter  remained  in  the  power  of  her  father  till  marriage,
she  could  not,  after  she  was  of  age,  be  given  away  without  her
own  express  and  free  consent.  A  father  might  chastise  his
child,  but  only  while  young,  and  even  then  not  to  such  extent
as  to  destroy  self-respect.  But  to  beat  a  grown-up  son  was
forbidden  on  pain  of  excommunication ;  and  the  apostolic


ioo  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

injunction  (Eph.  vi.  4),  "  Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children
to  wrath,"  finds  almost  its  literal  counterpart  in  the  Talmud
(Moed  K.  17  a).  Properly  speaking,  indeed,  the  Jewish  law
limited  the  absolute  obligation  of  a  father1  to' feed,  clothe,  and
house  his  child  to  his  sixth  year,  after  which  he  could  only  be
admonished  to  it  as  one  of  the  duties  of  love,  but  not  legally
constrained  (Chethub.  49  b  ;  65  b).  In  case  of  separation
of  the  parents,  the  mother  had  charge  of  the  daughters,  and
the  father  of  the  sons  ;  but  the  latter  also  might  be  intrusted
to  the  mother,  if  the  judges  considered  it  for  the  advantage
of  the  children.

A  few  notices  as  to  the  reverence  due  to  age  will  appro-
priately close  this  brief  sketch  of  Jewish  home  life.  It  was  a
beautiful  thought — however  some  may  doubt  its  exegetical
correctness — that  just  as  the  pieces  of  the  broken  tables  of
the  law  were  kept  in  the  ark,  so  old  age  should  be  venerated
and  cherished,  even  though  it  should  be  broken  in  mind  or
memory  (Ber.  8  b).  Assuredly,  Rabbinism  went  to  the
utmost  verge  in  this  matter  when  it  recommended  reverence
for  age,  even  though  it  were  in  the  case  of  one  ignorant  of
the  law,  or  of  a  Gentile.  There  were,  however,  diverging
opinions  on  this  point.  The  passage,  Lev.  xix.  32,  "Thou
shalt  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head,  and  honour  the  face  of  the
old  man,"  was  explained  to  refer  only  to  sages,  who  alone
were  to  be  regarded  as  old.  If  R.  Jose  compared  such  as
learned  of  young  men  to  those  who  ate  unripe  grapes  and
drank  of  new  wine,  R.  Jehudah  taught,  "  Look  not  at  the
bottles,  but  at  what  they  contain.  There  are  new  bottles  full
of  old  wine,  and  old  bottles  which  contain  not  even  new
wine "  (Ab.  iv.  20).  Again,  if  in  Deut.  xiii.  i,  2,  and  also,

1  A  mother  was  free  from  such  legal  obligation.


Jewish  Homes.  101

xviii.  21,  22,  the  people  were  directed  to  test  a  prophet  by
the  signs  which  he  showed — a  misapplication  of  which  was
made  by  the  Jews,  when  they  asked  Christ  what  sign  He
showed  unto  them  (John  ii.  18  ;  vi.  30) — while  in  Deut.
xvii.  10  they  were  told  simply  "  to  do  according  to  all  that
they  of  that  place  inform  thee,"  it  was  asked,  What,  then,  is
the  difference  between  an  old  man  and  a  prophet  ?  To  this
the  reply  was :  A  prophet  is  like  an  ambassador,  whom  you
believe  in  consequence  of  his  royal  credentials ;  but  an
ancient  is  one  whose  word  you  receive  without  requiring  such
evidence.  And  it  was  strictly  enjoined  that  proper  outward
marks  of  respect  should  be  shown  to  old  age,  such  as  to  rise
in  the  presence  of  older  men,  not  to  occupy  their  seats,  to
answer  them  modestly,  and  to  assign  to  them  the  uppermost
places  at  feasts.

After  having  thus  marked  how  strictly  Rabbinism  watched
over  the  mutual  duties  of  parents  and  children,  it  will  be
instructive  to  note  how  at  the  same  time  traditionalism,  in
its  worship  of  the  letter,  really  destroyed  the  spirit  of  the
Divine  law.  An  instance  will  here  suffice ;  and  that  which
we  select  has  the  double  advantage  of  illustrating  an  other-
wise difficult  allusion  in  the  New  Testament,  and  of  exhibiting
the  real  characteristics  of  traditionalism.  No  commandment
could  be  more  plainly  in  accordance,  alike  with  the  spirit
and  the  letter  of  the  law,  than  this :  "  He  that  curseth  father
or  mother,  let  him  die  the  death."  Yet  our  Lord  distinctly
charges  traditionalism  with  "transgressing"  it  (Matt.  xv.  4-6).
The  following  quotation  from  the  Mishnah  (Sank.  vii.  8)
curiously  illustrates  the  justice  of  His  accusation  :  "  He  that
curseth  his  father  or  his  mother  is  not  guilty,  unless  he  curses
them  with  express  mention  of  the  name  of  Jehovah."  In  any


IO2  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

other  case  the  sages  declare  him  absolved  !  And  this  is
by  no  means  a  solitary  instance  of  Rabbinical  perversion.
Indeed,  the  moral  systems  of  the  synagogue  leave  the  same
sad  impression  on  the  mind  as  its  doctrinal  teaching.  They
are  all  elaborate  chains  of  casuistry,  of  which  no  truer  descrip-
tion could  be  given  than  in  the  words  of  the  Saviour  (Matt,
xv.  6)  :  "  Ye  have  made  the  commandment  of  God  of  none
effect  by  your  tradition."


CHAPTER    VII.

THE  UPBRINGING  OF  JEWISH  CHILDREN.

THE  tenderness  of  the  bond  which  united  Jewish  parents
to  their  children  appears  even  in  the  multiplicity  and
pictorialness  of  the  expressions  by  which  the  various  stages
of  child-life  are  designated  in  the  Hebrew.  Besides  such
general  words  as  "  ben  "  and  "  bath  " — "  son  "  and  "  daughter  "
— we  find  no  fewer  than  nine  different  terms,  each  depicting  a
fresh  stage  of  life.1  The  first  of  these  simply  designates  the
babe  as  the  newly-"born" — the  "jeled,"  or,  in  the  feminine,
"jaldah" — as  in  Exod.  ii.  3,6,  8.  But  the  use  of  this  term
throws  a  fresh  light  on  the  meaning  of  some  passages  of
Scripture.  Thus  we  remember  that  it  is  applied  to  our  Lord
in  the  prophecy  of  His  birth  (Isa.  ix.  6) :  "  For  a  babe
('  jeled  ')  is  born  unto  us,  a  son  ('  ben ')  is  given  to  us  ;  "  while
in  Isa.  ii.  6  its  employment  adds  a  new  meaning  to  the  charge:
"They  please  themselves  (or  strike  hands)  with  the  '  jalde  ' —
the  *  babes  ' — of  strangers  " — marking  them,  so  to  speak,  as
not  only  the  children  of  strangers,  but  as  unholy  from  their
very  birth.  Compare  also  the  pictorial,  or  else  the  poetical,
use  of  the  word  "  jeled  "  in  such  passages  as  Isa.  xxix.  23  ;
Ivii.  4 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  20 ;  Eccl.  iv.  13  ;  I  Kings  xii.  8  ;  2  Kings

1  Compare  Hamburger,  Real-Encyd.  voL  L  p.  642.


IO4  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

ii.  24 ;  Gen.  xlii.  22 ;  and  others.  The  next  child-name,  in
point  of  time,  is  "jonek,"  which  means,  literally,  "a  suckling,"
being  also  sometimes  used  figuratively  of  plants,  like  our
English  " sucker,"  as  in  Isa.  liii.  2  :  "He  shall  grow  up  before
Him  as  a  sucker" — "jonek."  The  word  "jonek"  occurs,  for
example,  in  Isa.  xi.  8,  and  in  Ps.  viii.  2.  On  the  other  hand,
the  expression  in  the  latter  passage,  rendered  "  babes  "  in  our
Authorised  Version,  marks  a  yet  third  stage  in  the  child's
existence,  and  a  farther  advancement  in  the  babe-life.  This
appears  from  many  passages.  As  the  word  implies,  the  "  olel "
is  still  "  sucking  ; "  but  it  is  no  longer  satisfied  with  only  this
nourishment,  and  is  "  asking  bread,"  as  in  Lam.  iv.  4 :  "The
tongue  of  the  *  jonek'  cleaves  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth  for
thirst :  the  '  olalim '  ask  bread."  A  fourth  designation  re-
presents the  child  as  the  "  gamul,"  or  "  weaned  one "  (Ps.
cxxxi.  2  ;  Isa.  xi.  8  ;  xxviii.  9),  from  a  verb  which  primarily
means  to  complete,  and  secondarily  to  wean.  As  we  know,
the  period  of  weaning  among  the  Hebrews  was  generally  at
the  end  of  two  years  (Chethub.  60),  and  was  celebrated  by  a
feast.  After  that  the  fond  eye  of  the  Hebrew  parent  seems
to  watch  the  child  as  it  is  clinging  to  its  mother — as  it  were,
ranging  itself  by  her — whence  the  fifth  designation,  "  taph  "
(Esther  iii.  13,  "Tht  'taph'  and  the  women  in  one  day;"
Jer.  xl.  7  ;  Ezek.  ix.  6).  The  sixth  period  is  marked  by  the
word  "elem"  (in  the  feminine,  "  almah,"  as  in  Isa.  vii.  14,  of
the  virgin-mother),  which  denotes  becoming  firm  and  strong.
As  one  might  expect,  we  have  next  the  "  naar,"  or  youth —
literally,  he  who  shakes  off,  or  shakes  himself  free.  Lastly,
we  find  the  child  designated  as  "bachur,"  or  the  "ripened
one  ; "  a  young  warrior,  as  in  Isa.  xxxi.  8  ;  Jer.  xviii.  2 1 ;
xv.  8,  etc.  Assuredly,  those  who  so  keenly  watched  child-life


The   Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.  105

as  to  give  a  pictorial  designation  to  each  advancing  stage
of  its  existence,  must  have  been  fondly  attached  to  their
children.  — .

There  is  a  passage  in  the  Mishnah  (Abotk.  v.  21),  which
quaintly  maps  out  and,  as  it  were,  labels  the  different  periods
of  life  according  to  their  characteristics.  It  is  worth  repro-
ducing, if  only  to  serve  as  introduction  to  what  we  shall  have
to  say  on  the  upbringing  of  children.  Rabbi  Jehudah,  the
son  of  Tema,  says  :  "  At  five  years  of  age,  reading  of  th(
Bible  ;  at  ten  years,  learning  the  Mishnah ;  at  thirteen  years
bound  to  the  commandments ;  at  fifteen  years,  the  study  01
the  Talmud  ;  at  eighteen  years,  marriage  ;  at  twenty,  the
pursuit  of  trade  or  business  (active  life)  ;  at  thirty  years,  full
vigour ;  at  forty,  maturity  of  reason  ;  at  fifty,  for  counsel ;  at
sixty,  commencement  of  agedness  ;  at  seventy,  grey  age  ;  at
eighty,  advanced  old  age  ;  at  ninety,  bowed  down  ;  at  a
hundred,  as  if  he  were  dead  and  gone,  and  taken  from  the
world."  In  the  passage  just  quoted  the  age  of  five  is  men-
tioned as  that  when  a  child  is  expected  to  commence  reading
the  Bible — of  course,  in  the  original  Hebrew.  But  different
opinions  also  prevailed.  Generally  speaking,  such  early
instruction  was  regarded  as  only  safe  in  the  case  of  very
healthy  and  strong  children  ;  while  those  of  average  constitu-
tion were  not  to  be  set  to  regular  work  till  six  years  old.
There  is  both  common  sense  and  sound  experience  in  this
Talmudical  saying  (Cheth.  50),  "  If  you  set  your  child  to
regular  study  before  it  is  six  years  old,  you  shall  always  have
to  run  after,  and  yet  never  get  hold  of  it."  This  chiefly1*"
has  reference  to  the  irreparable  injury  to  health  caused  by
such  early  strain  upon  the  mind.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
we  come  upon  an  admonition  to  begin  teaching  a  child


106  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

when  it  is  three  years  old,  this  must  refer  to  such  early
instruction  as  that  of  certain  passages  of  Scripture,  or  of
small  isolated  portions  and  prayers,  which  a  parent  would
make  his  child  repeat  from  tenderest  years.  As  we  shall
show  in  the  sequel,  six  or  seven  was  the  age  at  which  a
parent  in  Palestine  was  legally  bound  to  attend  to  the
schooling  of  his  son.

But,  indeed,  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  say  when  the
instruction  of  the  Hebrew  child  really  commenced.  Looking
back,  a  man  must  have  felt  that  the  teaching  which  he  most —
indeed,  one  might  almost  say,  which  he  exclusively — valued
had  mingled  with  the  first  waking  thoughts  of  his  conscious-
ness.T  Before  the  child  could  speak — before  it  could  almost
understand  what  was  taught,  in  however  elementary  lan-
guage— before  it  would  even  take  in  the  domestic  rites  of  the
recurring  weekly  festival,  or  those  of  the  annual  feasts — it
must  have  been  attracted  by  the  so-called  "  Mesusah,"  which
was  fastened  at  the  door-post  of  every  "  clean  "  apartment,1
and  at  the  entrance  of  such  houses  as  were  inhabited  by  Jews
exclusively.  \  The  "Mesusah"  was  a  kind  of  phylactery  for  the
house,  serving  a  purpose  kindred  to  that  of  the  phylactery  for
the  person,  both  being  derived  from  a  misunderstanding  and
misapplication  of  the  Divine  direction  (Deut.  vi.  9 ;  xi.  20),
taking  in  the  letter  what  was  meant  for  the  spirit.  But  while
we  gladly  concede  that  the  earlier  Jewish  practice  was  free
from  some  of  the  present  almost  semi-heathenish  customs,3

1  The  "  Mesusah  "  was  not  affixed  to  any  that  were  not  "  diroth  cavod  " — dwell-
ings of  honour.     Thus  not  to  bath  rooms,  wash-houses,  tanneries,  dyeworks,  etc.
The  "  Mesusah  "  was  only  attached  to  dwelling-places,  not  to  synagogues.

2  The  tractate  Massecheth  Mesusah  (Kirchheim,  Septem  libri  Talm.  parvi  Hieros.
pp.  12-16)  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  authority  for  early  times.     But  even  the


The   Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.  107

and  further,  that  many  houses  in  Palestine  were  without  it,
there  can  be  little  doubt  that,  even  at  the  time  of  Christ,
this  "  Mesusah  "  would  be  found  wherever  a  family  was  at  all
Pharisaically  inclined.  For,  not  to  speak  of  what  seems  an
allusion  to  it,  so  early  as  in  Isa.  Ivii.  8,  we  have  the  distinct
testimony  of  Josephus  (Ant.  iv.  8,  13)  and  of  the  Mishnah  to
their  use  (Ber.  iii.  3  ;  MegilL  i.  8  ;  Moed  K.  iii.  4 ;  Men.  iii.  7
— in  the  last-mentioned  place,  even  with  superstitious  addi-
tions), f  Supposing  the  "  Mesusah  "  to  have  been  somewhat'
as  at  present,  it  would  have  consisted  of  a  small,  longitudi-
nally-folded parchment  square,  on  which,  on  twenty-two
lines,  these  two  passages  were  written :  Deut.  vi.  4-9,  and
xi.  13-21.  Inclosed  in  a  shining  metal  case,  and  affixed  to
the  door-post,  the  child,  when  carried  in  arms,  would  naturally
put  out  its  hand  to  it  ;  the  more  so,  that  it  would  see  the
father  and  all  others,  on  going  out  or  in,  reverently  touch  the
case,  and  afterwards  kiss  the  finger,  speaking  at  the  same
time  a  benediction.  For,  from  early  times,  the  presence  of  the
"  Mesusah "  was  connected  with  the  Divine  protection,  this
verse  being  specially  applied  to  it  :  "  The  Lord  shall  preserve
thy  going  out  and  thy  coming  in  from  this  time  forth,  and
even  for  evermore "  (Ps.  cxxi.  8).  \  Indeed,  one  of  the  mostT^
interesting  ancient  literary  monuments  in  existence —
"Mechilta,"  a  Jewish  commentary  on  the  book  of  Exodus,  the
substance  of  which  is  older  than  the  Mishnah  itself,  dating
from  the  beginning  of  the  second  century  of  our  era,  if  not
earlier — argues  the  efficacy  of  the  "  Mesusah  "  from  the  fact

"Sohar"  contains  much  that  is  little  better  than  heathen  superstition  on  the  sup-
posed efficacy  of  the  "Mesusah."  Among  later  superstitions  connected  with  it,
are  the  writing  of  the  name  "  Cuso  bemuchsas  cuso  "  (supposed  to  be  that  of
Israel's  watching  angel),  the  etymology  of  that  name,  etc.


io8  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

that,  since  the  destroying  angel  passed  over  the  doors  of
Israel  which  bore  the  covenant-mark,  a  much  higher  value
must  attach  to  the  "  Mesusah,"  which  embodied  the  name  of
the  Lord  no  less  than  ten  times,  and  was  to  be  found  in  the
dwellings  of  Israel  day  and  night  through  all  their  genera-
tions. From  this  to  the  magical  mysticism  of  the  "Kabbalah,"
and  even  to  such  modern  superstitions  as  that,  if  dust  or  dirt
were  kept  within  a  cubit  of  the  "  Mesusah,"  no  less  a  host  than
three  hundred  and  sixty-five  demons  would  come,  there  is  a
difference  of  degree  rather  than  of  kind.

But  to  return.  T  As  soon  as  the  child  had  any  knowledge,
the  private  and  the  united  prayers  of  the  family,  and  the
domestic  rites,  whether  of  the  weekly  Sabbath  or  of  festive
seasons,  would  indelibly  impress  themselves  upon  his  mind.
It  would  be  difficult  to  say  which  of  those  feasts  would  have
the  most  vivid  effect  upon  a  child's  imagination.  There  was
"  Chanukah,"  the  feast  of  the  Dedication,  with  its  illumination
of  each  house,  when  (in  most  cases)  the  first  evening  one  candle
would  be  lit  for  each  member  of  the  household,  the  number
increasing  each  night,  till,  on  the  eighth,  it  was  eight  times
that  of  the  first.  Then  there  was  "Purim,"  the  feast  of  Esther,
with  the  good  cheer  and  boisterous  merriment  which  it
brought ;  the  feast  of  Tabernacles,  when  the  very  youngest
of  the  house  had  to  live  out  in  the  booth  ;  and,  chiefest  of
leasts,  the  week  of  the  Passover,  when,  all  leaven  being
carefully  purged  out,  every  morsel  of  food,  by  its  differ-
ence from  that  ordinarily  used,  would  show  the  child  that
the  season  was  a  special  one.  From  the  moment  a  child  was
at  all  capable  of  being  instructed — still  more,  of  his  taking
any  part  in  the  services — the  impression  would  deepen  day  by
day.  Surely  no  one  who  had  ever  worshipped  within  the


The  Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.          109

courts  of  Jehovah's  house  at  Jerusalem  could  ever  have
forgotten  the  scenes  he  had  witnessed,  or  the  words  he  had
heard.  Standing  in  that  gorgeous,  glorious  building,  and
looking  up  its  terraced  vista,  the  child  would  watch  with
solemn  awe,  not  unmingled  with  wonderment,  as  the  great
throng  of  white-robed  priests  busily  moved  about,  while
the  smoke  of  the  sacrifice  rose  from  the  altar  of  burnt-
offering.  Then,  amid  the  hushed  silence  of  that  vast  multi-
tude, they  had  all  fallen  down  to  worship  at  the  time  of_
incense.  J  Again,  on  those  steps  that  led  up  to  the  innermost
sanctuary  the  priests  had  lifted  their  hands  and  spoken  over
the  people  the  words  of  blessing ;  and  then,  while  the  drink-
offering  was  poured  out,  the  Levites'  chant  of  Psalms  had  risen
and  swelled  into  a  mighty  volume  ;  the  exquisite  treble  of  the
Levite  children's  voices  being  sustained  by  the  rich  round
notes  of  the  men,  and  accompanied  by  instrumental  music.
The  Jewish  child  knew  many  of  these  words.  They  had  been
the  earliest  songs  he  had  heard — almost  his  first  lesson  when
clinging  as  a  "  taph  "  to  his  mother.  But  now,  in  those  white-
marbled,  gold-adorned  halls,  under  heaven's  blue  canopy,  and
with  such  surroundings,  they  would  fall  upon  his  ear  like
sounds  from  another  world,  to  which  the  prolonged  threefold
blasts  from  the  silver  trumpets  of  the  priests  would  seem  to
waken  him.  And  they  were  sounds  from  another  world  ;  for,
as  his  father  would  tell  him,  all  that  he  saw  was  after  the
exact  pattern  of  heavenly  things  which  God  had  shown  to
Moses  on  Mount  Sinai ;  all  that  he  heard  was  God-uttered,
spoken  by  Jehovah  Himself  through  the  mouth  of  His  servant
David,  and  of  the  other  sweet  singers  of  Israel.  Nay,  that
place  and  that  house  were  God-chosen ;  and  in  the  thick
darkness  of  the  Most  Holy  Place — there  afar  off,  where  the


no  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

high-priest  himself  entered  on  one  day  of  the  year  only,  and
in  simple  pure  white  vesture,  not  in  those  splendid  golden
garments  in  which  he  was  ordinarily  arrayed — had  once  stood
the  ark,  with  the  veritable  tables  of  the  law,  hewn  and
graven  by  the  very  hand  of  God  ;  and  between  the  cherubim
had  then  throned  in  the  cloud  the  visible  presence  of  Jehovah.
Verily  this  Temple  with  its  services  was  heaven  upon  earth !

Nor  would  it  have  been  easy  to  lose  the  impression  of  the
first  Paschal  Supper  which  a  child  had  attended.  There  was
that  about  its  symbols  and  services  which  appealed  to  every
feeling,  even  had  it  not  been  that  the  law  expressly  enjoined
full  instruction  to  be  given  as  to  every  part  and  rite  of  the
service,  as  well  as  to  the  great  event  recorded  in  that  supper.
For  in  that  night  had  Israel  been  born  as  a  nation,  and
redeemed  as  the  "  congregation  "  of  the  Lord.  Then  also,  as
in  a  mould,  had  their  future  history  been  cast  to  all  time ;
and  there,  as  in  type,  had  its  eternal  meaning  and  import  for  all
men  been  outlined,  and  with  it  God's  purpose  of  love  and  work
of  grace  foreshadowed.  Indeed,  at  a  certain  part  of  the  service
it  was  expressly  ordained,  that  the  youngest  at  the  Paschal
table  should  rise  and  formally  ask  what  was  the  meaning
of  all  this  service,  and  how  that  night  was  distinguished
from  others  ;  to  which  the  father  was  to  reply,  by  relating,  in
language  suited  to  the  child's  capacity,  the  whole  national
history  of  Israel,  from  the  calling  of  Abraham  down  to  the
deliverance  from  Egypt  and  the  giving  of  the  law  ;  "  and  the
nore  fully,"  it  is  added,  "  he  explains  it  all,  the  better."/  In
view  of  all  this,  Philo  might  indeed,  without  exaggeration,  say
that  the  Jews  "were  from  their  swaddling  clothes,  even  before
being  taught  either  the  sacred  laws  or  the  unwritten  customs,
trained  by  their  parents,  teachers,  and  instructors  to  recognise


The   Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.  \  1 1

God  as  Father  and  as  the  Maker  of  the  world "  (Legat.  ad
Cajum,  sec.  16) ;  and  that,  "having  been  taught  the  know-
ledge (of  the  laws)  from  earliest  youth,  they  bore  in  their  souls
the  image  of  the  commandments"  (ibid.  sec.  31).  To  the
same  effect  is  the  testimony  of  Josephus,  that  "  from  their
earliest  consciousness  "  they  had  "  learned  the  laws,  so  as  to
have  them,  as  it  were,  engraven  upon  the  soul "  (Ag.  Apion,
ii.  1 8) ;  although,  of  course,  we  do  not  believe  it,  when,  with
his  usual  boastful  magniloquence,  he  declares  that  at  the
age  of  fourteen  he  had  been  "  frequently  "  consulted  by  "  the
high  priests  and  principal  men  of  the  city  .  .  .  about
the  accurate  understanding  of  points  of  the  law"  (Life,  2;
compare  also  Ant.  iv.  8,  12  ;  Ag.  Apion,  i.  12;  ii.  25).

But  there  is  no  need  of  such  testimony.  The  Old  Testa-
ment, the  Apocrypha,  and  the  New  Testament,  leading  us
progressively  from  century  to  century,  indicate  the  same  care-
fulness in  the  upbringing  of  children.  One  of  the  earliest
narratives  of  Scripture  records  how  God  said  to  Abraham,  "  I
know  him,  that  he  will  command  his  children,  and  his  house-
hold after  him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  Jehovah,  to  do
justice  and  judgment "  (Gen.  xviii.  19) — a  statement  which,
we  may  riote  by  the  way,  implies  the  distinction  between  the
seed  of  Abraham  after  the  flesh  and  after  the  spirit1  How
thoroughly  the  spirit  of  this  Divine  utterance  was  carried  out
under  the  law,  appears  from  a  comparison  of  such  passages
as  Ex.  xii.  26  ;  xiii.  8,  14;  Deut.  iv.  9,  10 ;  vi.  7,  20;  xi.  19;
xxxi.  13  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  5,  6.  It  is  needless  to  pursue  the
subject  farther,  or  to  show  how  even  God's  dealings  with  His
people  were  regarded  as  the  basis  and  model  of  the  parental
relationship.  But  the  book  in  the  Old  Testament  which,  if

1  See  Oehler,  Theol.  d.  A.  Test.  vol.  i.  p.  91.


112  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

properly  studied,  would  give  us  the  deepest  insight  into  social
and  family  life  under  the  old  dispensation — we  mean  the  book
of  Proverbs — is  so  full  of  admonitions  about  the  upbringing  of
children,  that  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  the  reader  generally  to  it.
He  will  find  there  the  value  of  such  training,  its  object,  in  the
acquisition  of  true  wisdom  in  the  fear  and  service  of  Jehovah,
and  the  opposite  dangers  most  vividly  portrayed — the  practical
bearing  of  all  being  summed  up  in  this  aphorism,  true  to  all

*  times  :r"  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go,  and  when

he  is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it "  (Prov.  xxii.  6) ;  of  which

we  have  this  New  Testament  application :  "  Bring  up  (your

children)    in    the    nurture    and    admonition    of    the    Lord"

JEph.  vi.  4).

p  The  book  of  Proverbs  brings  before  us  yet  another  phase
of  deepest  interest.  It  contains  the  fullest  appreciation  of
woman  in  her  true  dignity,  and  of  her  position  and  influence
in  the  family-life.  It  is  quite  true,  as  we  shall  presently  show,
that  the  obligation  to  train  the  child  rested  primarily  upon
the  father,  and  that  both  by  the  law  of  God  and  by  the
ordinances  of  the  Rabbis.  But  even  the  patriarchal  story  will
prepare  an  attentive  reader  to  find,  especially  in  the  early
upbringing  of  children,  that  constant  influence  of  woman,
which,  indeed,  the  nature  of  the  maternal  relationship  implies,
provided  the  family-life  be  framed  on  the  model  of  the  Word
of  God.  Lovelier  pictures  of  this  than  the  mother  of  Samuel
and  the  pious  Shunammite  hostess  of  Elisha  can  scarcely  be
conceived.  But  the  book  of  Proverbs  shows  us,  that  even  in  the
early  times  of  the  Jewish  monarchy  this  characteristic  of  Old
Testament  life  also  appeared  outside  the  bounds  of  the  Holy
Land,  wherever  pious  Israelites  had  their  settlements,  j  The

""subject  is  so  deeply  interesting,  historically  and  religiously,


The   Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.  113

and  perhaps  so  new  to  some  readers,  that  a  slight  digression
may  be  allowed  us.

Beyond  the  limits  of  the  Holy  Land,  close  by  Dumah,  lay
the  land  or  district  of  Massa  (Gen.  xxv.  14),  one  of  the  original
seats  of  the  Ishmaelites  (i  Chron.  i.  30).  From  Isa.  xxi.  II
we  gather  that  it  must  have  been  situate  beyond  Seir — that  is,
to  the  south-east  of  Palestine,  in  Northern  Arabia.  Whether
the  Ishmaelites  of  Massa  had  come  to  the  knowledge  of
Jehovah,  the  true  God ;  whether  Massa  was  occupied  by  a
Jewish  colony,  which  there  established  the  service  of  the
Lord;1  or  whether,  through  the  influence  of  Hebrew  immi-
grants, such  a  religious  change  had  been  brought  about,
certain  it  is,  that  the  two  last  chapters  of  the  book  of  Proverbs
introduce  the  royal  family  of  Massa  as  deeply  imbued  with  the
spiritual  religion  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  queen-mother
as  training  the  heir  to  the  throne  in  the  knowledge  and  fear
of  the  Lord.2  Indeed,  so  much  is  this  the  case,  that  the
instruction  of  the  queen  of  Massa,  and  the  words  of  her  two
royal  sons,  are  inserted  in  the  book  of  Proverbs  as  part  of  the
inspired  records  of  the  Old  Testament.  According  to  the
best  criticism,  Prov.  xxx.  I  should  be  thus  rendered:  "The
words  of  Agur,  the  son  of  her  whom  Massa  obeys.  Spake
the  man  to  God-with-me — God  with  me,  and  I  was  strong."3

1  From  I  .Chron.  iv.  38-43  we  infer  colonisation  in  that  direction,  especially  on
the  part  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon.     Utterances  in  the  prophets  (such  as  in  Isa.  xxi.
and  Micah  i. )  seem  also  to  indicate  a  very  wide  spread  of  Jewish  settlers.     It  is  a
remarkable  fact  that,  according  to  mediaeval  Jewish  and  Arab  writers,  the  districts
of  Massa  and  Dumah  were  largely  inhabited  by  Jews   (see   Ritter,  Arabien,
p.  406).

2  There  can  be  no  question  that  the  word  rendered  in  the  Authorised  Version
(Prov.  xxx.   i  and  xxxi.   i)  by   "prophecy"  is  simply  the  name  of  a  district,
"  Massa."

3  Or,  according  to  another  rendering,  "Spake  the  man  :  I  diligently  searched

1


1 14  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Then  Prov.  xxxi.  embodies  the  words  of  Agur's  royal
brother,  even  "the  words  of  Lemuel,  king  of  Massa,  with
wnich  his  mother  taught  him."  If  the  very  names  of  these
two  princes — Agur,  "  exile,"  and  Lemuel,  "  for  God,"  or
"  dedicated  to  God  " — are  significant  of  her  convictions,  the
teaching  of  that  royal  mother,  as  recorded  in  Prov.  xxxi.  2-9,
is  worthy  of  a  "mother  in  Israel."  No  wonder  that  the  record
of  her  teaching  is  followed  by  an  enthusiastic  description  of  a
godly  woman's  worth  and  work  (Prov.  xxxi.  10-31),  each  verse
beginning  with  a  successive  letter  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,1
like  the  various  sections  of  Ps.  cxix. — as  it  were,  to  let  her
praises  ring  through  every  letter  of  speech.
T  As  might  have  been  expected,  the  spirit  of  the  Apocryphal
books  is  far  different  from  that  which  breathes  in  the  Old
Testament.  Still,  such  a  composition  as  Ecclesiasticus  shows
that  even  in  comparatively  late  and  degenerate  times  the.
godly  upbringing  of  children  occupied  a  most  prominent
place  in  religious  thinking.  But  it  is  when  we  approach  the
New  Testament,  that  a  fresh  halo  of  glory  seems  to  surround
woman.  And  here  our  attention  is  directed  to  the  spiritual
influence  of  mothers  rather  than  of  fathers.  Not  to  mention
"  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children,"  nor  the  mother  of  John
Mark,  whose  home  at  Jerusalem  seems  to  have  been  the
meeting-place  and  the  shelter  of  the  early  disciples,  and  that
in  times  of  the  most  grievous  persecution  ;  nor  yet  "  the  elect
lady  and  her  children,"  whom  not  only  St.  John,  "  but  also  all
they  that  know  the  truth,"  loved  in  truth  (2  John  i),  and  her

after  God,  and  I- am  become  weary."     This,  of  course,  is  not  the  place  for  critical
discussion  ;  but  we  may  say  that  we  have  followed  the  general  conclusions  adopted
alike  by  Delitzsch  and  Zockler,  and  by  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  Berthcau.
1  The  Hebrew  alphabet  has  twenty-two  letters.


The  Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.          115

similarly  elect  sister  with  her  children  (ver.  13),  two  notable
instances  will  occur  to  the  reader.  \  The  first  of  these  presents
a  most  touching  instance  of  a  mother's  faith,  and  prayers,  and
labour  of  love,  to  which  the  only  parallel  in  later  history  is
that  of  Monica,  the  mother  of  St.  Augustine.  How  Eunice,
the  daughter  of  the  pious  Lois,  had  come  to  marry  a  heathen,1
we  know  as  little  as  the  circumstances  which  may  have
originally  led  the  family  to  settle  at  Lystra  (Acts  xvi.  I ;  com-
pare xiv.  6,  etc.),  a  place  where  there  was  not  even  a  syna-
gogue. At  most  then  two  or  three  Jewish  families  lived  in
that  heathen  city.  Perhaps  Lois  and  Eunice  were  the  only
worshippers  of  Jehovah  there ;  for  we  do  not  even  read  of  a
meeting-place  for  prayer,  such  as  that  by  the  river-side  where
Paul  first  met  Lydia.  Yet  in  such  adverse  circumstances,  and
as  the  wife  of  a  Greek,  Eunice  proved  one  to  whom  royal
'  Lemuel's  praise  applied  in  the  fullest  sense  :  "  Her  children
arise  up  and  call  her  blessed,"  and  "Her  works  praise  her  in  the
gates  " — of  the  new  Jerusalem.  Not  a  truer  nor  more  touching
portraiture  of  a  pious  Jewish  home  could  have  been  drawn
than  in  these  words  of  St.  Paul :  "  I  call  to  remembrance  the
unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee,  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grand-
mother Lois,  and  thy  mother  Eunice  ;  "  and  again,  "  From  a
child  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures  "  (2  Tim.  i.  5  ;
iii.  15).  There  was,  we  repeat,  no  synagogue  in  Lystra  where
Timothy  might  have  heard  every  Sabbath,  and  twice  in  the
week,  Moses  and  the  Prophets  read,  and  derived  other
religious  knowledge  ;  there  was,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  neither
religious  companionship  nor  means  of  instruction  of  any  kind.

1  The  language  of  the  New  Testament  leads  to  the  inference  that  Timothy's
father  was  not  only  by  birth,  but  continued  a  Greek— being  not  merely  a  heathen,
but  not  eren  a  Jewish  proselyte.


ii  6  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

nor  religious  example,  not  even  from  his  father;  but  all
around  quite  the  contrary.  But  there  was  one  influence  for
highest  good — constant,  unvarying,  and  most  powerful.  It
was  that  of  a  "  mother  in  Israel."  From  the  time  that  as  a
"  taph  "  he  clung  to  her— even  before  that,  when  a  "  gamul,"
an  "  olel,"  and  a  "  jonek  " — had  Eunice  trained  Timothy  in  the
nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  To  quote  again  the
forcible  language  of  St.  Paul,  "  From  an  infant M1  (or  baby)
"  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to
make  thee  wise  unto  salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in
Christ  Jesus."

From  the  Apocrypha,  from  Josephus,  and  from  the  Talmud
we  know  what  means  of  instruction  in  the  Scriptures  were
within  reach  of  a  pious  mother  at  that  time.  In  a  house  like
that  of  Timothy's  father  there  would,  of  course,  be  no  phylac-
teries, with  the  portions  of  Scripture  which  they  contained,
and  probably  no  "  Mesusah,"  although,  according  to  the
Mishnah  (Ber.  iii.  3),  the  latter  duty  was  incumbent,  not  only
upon  men  but  upon  women.  The  Babylon  Talmud  (Ber.
20  b)  indeed  gives  a  very  unsatisfactory  reason  for  the  latter
provision.  But  may  it  not  be  that  the  Jewish  law  had  such
cases  in  view  as  that  of  Eunice  and  her  son,  without  expressly
saying  so,  from  fear  of  lending  a  sanction  to  mixed  marriages  ?
Be  this  as  it  may,  we  know  that  at  the  time  of  the  Syrian
persecutions,  just  before  the  rising  of  the  Maccabees,  the
possession  of  portions  or  of  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament
by  private  families  was  common  in  Israel.  For,  part  of  those

The  Greek  term  means  literally  "a  baby,"  and  is  so  used,  not  only  by
classical  writers,  but  in  all  the  passages  in  which  it  occurs  in  the  New  Testament,
which  are  as  follows  :  Luke  i.  41,  44  ;  ii.  12,  16 ;  xviii.  15  ;  Acts  vii.  19  ;  2  Tim.
iii.  15  ;  and  X  Pet.  ii.  2.


The   Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.          117

persecutions  consisted  in  making  search  for  these  Scriptures
and  destroying  them  (i  Mace.  i.  57),  as  well  as  punishing
their  possessors  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  5,  4).  Of  course,  during  the
period  of  religious  revival  which  followed  the  triumph  of  the
Maccabees,  such  copies  of  the  Bible  would  have  greatly
multiplied.  It  is  by  no  means  an  exaggeration  to  say  that,  if
perhaps  only  the  wealthy  possessed  a  complete  copy  of  the
Old  Testament,  written  out  on  parchment  or  on  Egyptian
paper,  there  would  scarcely  be  a  pious  home,  however  humble,
which  did  not  cherish  as  its  richest  treasure  some  portion  of
the  Word  of  God — whether  the  five  books  of  the  Law,  or  the
Psalter,  or  a  roll  of  one  or  more  of  the  Prophets.  Besides,  we
know  from  the  Talmud  l  that  at  a  later  period,  and  probably  at
the  time  of  Christ  also,  there  were  .  little  parchment  rolls
specially  for  the  use  of  children,  containing  such  portions  of
Scripture  as  the  "  Shema  "2  (Deut.  vi.  4-9  ;  xi.  13-21  ;  Num.
xv.  37-41),  the  "  Hallel "  (Ps.  cxiii.-cxviii.),  the  history  of  the
Creation  to  that  of  the  Flood,  and  the  first  eight  chapters
of  the  book  of  Leviticus.  Such  means  of  instruction  there
would  be  at  the  disposal  of  Eunice  in  teaching  her  son.

And  this  leads  us  to  mention,  with  due  reverence,  the  other
and  far  greater  New  Testament  instance  of  maternal  influence
in  Israel.!  It  is  none  less  than  that  of  the  mother  of  our
blessed  Lord  Himself.  While  the  fact  that  Jesus  became
subject  to  His  parents,  and  grew  in  wisdom  and  in  favour
both  with  God  and  man,  forms  part  of  the  unfathomable
mystery  of  His  self-humiliation,  the  influence  exerted  upon

1  Compare  Herzfeld,  Gesch.  d.  Volk.  Jes.  vol.  iii.  p.  267,  note.

•The  "Shema"— so  called  from  the  first  word,  "Shema"  ("Hear,  O
Israel ")— forms  part  of  the  regular  prayers  ;  as  the  section  called  "Hallel"
("praise")  was  appointed  to  be  sung  at  certain  reasons.


n8  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

His  early  education,  especially  by  His  mother,  seems  implied
throughout  the  gospel  history.  Of  course,  His  was  a  pious
Jewish  home ;  and  at  Nazareth  there  was  a  synagogue,  to
which,  as  we  shall  by-and-by  explain,  a  school  was  probably
attached.  In  that  synagogue  Moses  and  the  Prophets  would
be  read,  and,  as  afterwards  by  Himself  (Luke  iv.  16),  dis-
courses or  addresses  be  delivered  from  time  to  time.  What
was  taught  in  these  synagogue-schools,  and  how,  will  be
shown  in  another  chapter.  But,  whether  or  not  Jesus  had
attended  such  a  school,  His  mind  was  so  thoroughly  imbued
with  the  Sacred  Scriptures—  He  was  so  familiar  with  them  in
their  every  detail — that  we  cannot  fail  to  infer  that  the  home
of  Nazareth  possessed  a  precious  copy  of  its  own  of  the  entire
Sacred  Volume,  which  from  earliest  childhood  formed,  so  to
speak,  the  meat  and  drink  of  the  God-Man.  More  than  that,
there  is  clear  evidence  that  He  was  familiar  with  the  art  of
writing,  which  was  by  no  means  so  common  in  those  days  as
reading.  The  words  of  our  Lord,  as  reported  both  by  St.
Matthew  (Matt.  v.  18)  and  by  St.  Luke  (Luke  xvi.  17),  also
prove  that  the  copy  of  the  Old  Testament  from  which  He  had
drawn  was  not  only  in  the  original  Hebrew,  but  written,  like
our  modern  copies,  in  the  so-called  Assyrian,  and  not  in  the
ancient  Hebrew-Phoenician  characters.  This  appears  from
the  expression  "  one  iota  or  one  little  hook  " — erroneously
rendered  "  tittle  "  in  our  Authorised  Version — which  can  only
apply  to  the  modern  Hebrew  characters.  That  our  Lord
taught  in  Aramaean,  and  that  He  used  and  quoted  the  Holy
Scriptures  in  the  Hebrew,  perhaps  sometimes  rendering  them
for  popular  use  into  Aramaean,1  there  can  be  little  doubt  on  the

1  Keim  («.*.),  p.  430,  rightly  instances  Matt,  xxvii.  46  as  an  instance  of  "the
Aramaean  colouring  "  of  the  Hebrew  text.     We  quote  Keim  the  more  readily,  as


The  Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.         1 19

part  of  careful  and  unprejudiced  students,  though  some  learned
men  have  held  the  opposite.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  Mish-
nah  (Megill.  i.  8)  seems  to  allow  the  writing  of  Holy  Scripture
in  any  language  ;  but  even  Simeon,  the  son  of  Gamaliel  (the
teacher  of  St.  Paul),  confined  this  concession  to  the  Greek —
no  doubt  with  a  view  to  the  LXX.,  which  was  so  "widely
spread  in  his  time.  But  we  also  know  from  the  Talmud,  how
difficult  it  was  for  a  Rabbi  to  defend  the  study  or  use  of
Greek,  and  how  readily  popular  prejudice  burst  into  a
universal  and  sweeping  condemnation  of  it.1  The  same  im-
pression is  conveyed  not  only  from  the  immediate  favourable
change  which  the  use  of  the  Aramaean  by  St.  Paul  produced
upon  the  infuriated  people  (Acts  xxi.  40),  but  also  from  the
fact  that  only  an  appeal  to  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  could  have
been  of  authority  in  discussion  with  the  Pharisees  and  Scribes,
and  that  it  alone  gave  point  to  the  frequent  expostulations  of
Christ :  "  Have  ye  not  read  ?"  (Matt.  xii.  3  ;  xix.  4;  xxi.  13,
16,42;  xxii.  31).

This  familiarity  from  earliest  childhood  with  the  Scriptures
in  the  Hebrew  original  also  explains  how  at  the  age  of  twelve
Jesus  could  be  found  "  in  the  Temple  ;  sitting  in  the  midst  of
the  doctors,  both  hearing  them  and  asking  them  questions "
(Luke  ii.  46).  In  explaining  this  seemingly  strange  circum-
stance, we  may  take  the  opportunity  of  correcting  an  almost
universal  mistake.  It  is  generally  thought  that,  on  the
occasion  referred  to,  the  Saviour  had  gone  up,  as  being  "  of

being  a  strong  opponent  of  the  orthodox  view  ;  although  his  work  is  far  more  care-
ful and  reverent  than  others  that  have  of  late  issued,  especially  from  the  French
press,  which  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  read  without  astonishment  at  the  power  of
assertion,  and  moral  indignation  at  what  is  asserted.

1  The  fact  that  the  Evangelists  so  frequently  quote  from  the  LXX  does  not  in
the  least  affect  the  argument  that  our  Lord  used  the  Hebrew  text.


12O  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

age,"  in  the  Jewish  sense  of  the  expression,  or,  to  use  their
own  terms,  as  a  "  Bar  Mizvah,"  or  "  son  of  the  command-
ment," by  which  the  period  was  marked  when  religious  obli-
gations and  privileges  devolved  upon  a  youth,  and  he  became
a  member  of  the  congregation.  But  the  legal  age  for  this
was  not  twelve,  but  thirteen  (Ab.  v.  21).  On  the  other  hand,
the  Rabbinical  law  enjoined  ( Yoma,  82  a)  that  even  before
that — two  years,  or  at  least  one  year — lads  should  be  brought
up  to  the  Temple,  and  made  to  observe  the  festive  rites.1
Unquestionably,  it  was  in  conformity  with  this  universal
custom  that  Jesus  went  on  the  occasion  named  to  the  Temple.
Again,  we  know  that  it  was  the  practice  of  the  members  of
the  various  Sanhedrims — who  on  ordinary  days  sat  as  judi-
catories,  from  the  close  of  the  morning  to  the  time  of  the
evening  sacrifice  (Sank.  88  b) — to  come  out  upon  the  Sab-
baths and  feast-days  on  "  the  terrace  of  the  Temple,"  and
there  publicly  to  teach  and  expound,  the  utmost  liberty  being
given  of  asking  questions,  discussing,  objecting,  and  otherwise
taking  intelligent  part  in  these  lectures.  On  the  occasion  of
Christ's  presence,  these  discussions  would,  as  usual,  be  carried
on  during  the  "  Moed  Katon,"  or  minor  festive  days,  inter-
vening between  the  second  and  the  last  day  of  the  Paschal
week.  Joseph  and  Mary,  on  the  other  hand,  had,  as  allowed
by  the  law,  returned  towards  Nazareth  on  the  third  day  of
the  Paschal  week,  while  Jesus  remained  behind.  These  cir-
cumstances also  explain  why  His  appearance  in  the  midst  of
the  doctors,  although  very  remarkable  considering  His  age,
did  not  at  once  command  universal  attention.  Jn  point  of
fact,  the  only  qualification  requisite,  so  far  as  learning  was

1  Compare   Altingius,  Academ.  Dissert,  p.  336,  who  is  almost  the  only  one
correct  on  this  point.


The  Upbringing  of  Jewish  Children.          121

concerned,  would  be  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures
in  the  Hebrew,  and  a  proper  understanding  of  them.1

What  we  have  hitherto  described  will  have  conveyed  to  the
reader  that  the  one  branch  of  instruction  aimed  after  or
desired  by  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  Christ  was  religious
knowledge.  What  was  understood  by  this,  and  how  it  was
imparted — whether  in  the  family  or  in  the  public  schools —
must  form  the  subject  of  special  investigation.

1  Lightfoot  (Horce  Hebr.  in  Luc.  ii.  46)  gives  an  entirely  fanciful  and  erroneous
view  of  the  matter,  representing  the  Saviour  as  either  actually  teaching  or  at  least
qualified  to  take  part  in  the  regular  discussions  and  instructions  of  the  Rabbis.
The  note  of  Wetstein  (Nov.  Test.  i.  p.  668)  approximates  more  near!)  the  correct
riew.


CHAPTER    VIII.

SUBJECTS  OF  STUDY.  HOME  EDUCATION  IN  ISRAEL  ;  FEMALE
EDUCATION.  ELEMENTARY  SCHOOLS,  SCHOOLMASTERS,
AND  SCHOOL  ARRANGEMENTS.

IF  a  faithful  picture  of  society  in  ancient  Greece  or  Rome
were  to  be  presented  to  view,  it  is  not  easy  to  believe  that
?ven  they  who  now  most  oppose  the  Bible  could  wish  their
aims  success.  For  this,  at  any  rate,  may  be  asserted,  without
fear  of  gainsaying,  that  no  other  religion  than  that  of  the
Bible  has  proved  competent  to  control  an  advanced,  or  even
an  advancing,  state  of  civilisation.  Every  other  bound  has
been  successively  passed  and  submerged  by  the  rising  tide  ;
how  deep  only  the  student  of  history  knows.  Two  things
are  here  undeniable.  In  the  case  of  heathenism  every
advance  in  civilisation  has  marked  a  progressive  lowering
of  public  morality,  the  earlier  stages  of  national  life  always
showing  a  far  higher  tone  than  the  later.  On  the  contrary,
the  religion  of  the  Bible  (under  the  old  as  under  the  new  dis-
pensation) has  increasingly  raised,  if  not  uniformly  the  public
morals,  yet  always  the  tone  and  standard  of  public  morality  ;
it  has  continued  to  exhibit  a  standard  never  yet  attained,  and


Subjects  of  Study.  123

it  has  proved  its  power  to  control  public  and  social  life,  to
influence  and  to  mould  it.

Strange  as  it  may  sound,  it  is  strictly  true  that,  beyond  the
boundaries  of  Israel,  it  would  be  scarcely  possible  to  speak
with  any  propriety  of  family  life,  or  even  of  the  family,  as  we
understand  these  terms.     It  is  significant,  that  the   Roman
historian  Tacitus  should  mark  it  as  something  special  among
the  Jews1 — which  they  only  shared  with  the  ancient  barbarian
Germans2 — that   they   regarded   it  as   a   crime  to  kill  their
offspring  !     This  is  not  the  place  to  describe  the  exposure  of
children,  or  the  various  crimes  by  which  ancient  Greece  and
Rome,  in  the  days  of   their  highest  cu'ture,  sought  to  rid
themselves  of  what  was  regarded  as  superfluous  population.
Few  of  those  who  have  learned  to  admire  classical  antiquity
have  a  full  conception  of  any  one  phase  in  its  social  life —
whether  of  the  position  of  woman,  the  relation  of  the  sexes,
slavery,   the   education    of    children,   their  relation    to   their
parents,  or  the  state  of  public  morality.     Fewer  still  have
combined  all  these  features  into  one  picture,  and   that  not
merely  as  exhibited  by  the  lower  orders,  or  even  among  the
higher  classes,  but  as  fully  owned  and  approved  by  those
whose  names  have  descended  in  the  admiration  of  ages  as  the
thinkers,  the  sages,  the  poets,  the  historians,  and  the  statesmen
of  antiquity.     Assuredly,  St.  Paul's  description  of  the  ancient
world  in  the  first  and  second  chapters  of  his  Epistle  to  the
Romans  must  have  appeared  to  those  who  lived  in  the  midst
of  it  as  Divine  even  in  its  tenderness,  delicacy,  and  charity ;

1  Tacitus,  Hist.  v.  5.     In  general  this  fifth  book  is  most  interesting,  as  showing
the  strange  mixture  of  truth  and  error,  and  the  intense  hatred  of  the  Jewish  race
even  on  the  part  of  such  men  as  Tacitus.

2  De  Germania,  xix.


124  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

the  full  picture  under  bright  sunlight  would  have  been  scarcely
susceptible  of  exhibition.  For  such  a  world  there  was  only
one  alternative — either  the  judgment  of  Sodom,  or  the  mercy
of  the  Gospel  and  the  healing  of  the  Cross.1

When  we  pass  from  the  heathen  world  into  the  homes  of
Israel,  even  the  excess  of  their  exclusiveness  seems  for  the
moment  a  relief.  It  is  as  if  we  turned  from  enervating,
withering,  tropical  heat  into  a  darkened  room,  whose  grateful
coolness  make.*  us  for  the  moment  forget  that  its  gloom  is
excessive,  and  cannot  continue  as  the  day  declines.  And  this
shutting  out  of  all  from  without,  this  exclusiveness,  applied
not  only  to  what  concerned  their  religion,  their  social  and

?  family  life,  but  also  to  their  knowledge.  In  the  days  of
Christ  the  pious  Jew  had  no  other  knowledge,-  neither  sought
nor  cared  for  any  other — in  fact,  denounced  it — than  that  of
the  law  of  God.  At  the  outset,  let  it  be  remembered  that,
in  heathenism,  theology,  or  rather  mythology,  had  no  in-
fluence whatever  on  thinking  or  life — was  literally  submerged
under  their  waves.  To  the  pious  Jew,  on  the  contrary,  the
knowledge  of  God  was  everything ;  and  to  prepare  for  or
impart  that  knowledge  was  the  sum  total,  the  sole  object  of
his  education.  This  was  the  life  of  his  soul — the  better,  and

i  Let  it  not  be  thought  that  we  have  been  guilty  of  the  slightest  exaggeration.
The  difficulty  here  is  to  tell  the  truth  and  yet  find  moderate  terms  in  which  to
express  it.  That  Christianity  should  have  laid  its  hold  on  such  a  society,  found
there  its  brightest  martyrs  and  truest  followers,  and  finally  subdued  and  trans-
formed it,  is  quite  as  great  a  miracle  as  that  of  the  breaking  down  of  the
middle  wall  of  partition  among  the  Jews,  or  their  spiritual  transformation  of
mind  and  heart  from  self-righteousness  and  externalism*  In  either  case,  to  the
student  of  history  the  miracle  will  seem  greater  than  if  "one  rose  from  the
dead."  The  general  reader  who  wishes  more  details  about  the  state  of
heathenism  is  referred  to  the  admirable  work  of  Dollinger,  Heidenthum  u.
Judenth.  pp.  679-728.


Subjects  of  Study.  125

only  true  life,  to  which  all  else  as  well  as  the  life  of  the  body
were  merely  subservient,  as  means  towards  an  end.  His
religion  consisted  of  two  things  :  knowledge  of  God,  which
by  a  series  of  inferences,  one  from  the  other,  ultimately
resolved  itself  into  theology,  as  they  understood  it ;  and
service,  which  again  consisted  of  the  proper  observance  of  all
that  was  prescribed  by  God,  and  of  works  of  charity  towards
men — the  latter,  indeed,  going  beyond  the  bound  of  what  was
strictly  due  (the  Chovoth)  into  special  merit  or  "  righteous-
ness "  (Zedakah).  But  as  service  presupposed  knowledge,
theology  was  again  at  the  foundation  of  all,  and  also  the
crown  of  all,  which  conferred  the  greatest  merit.  This  is
expressed  or  implied  in  almost  innumerable  passages  of
Jewish  writings:  Let  one  suffice,  not  only  because  it  sounds
more  rationalistic,  but  because  it  is  to  this  day  repeated  each
morning  in  his  prayers  by  every  Jew  :  "  These  are  the  things
of  which  a  man  eats  the  fruit  in  this  world,  but  their  posses-
sion1 continueth  for  the  next  world  :  to  honour  father  and
mother,  pious  works,  peacemaking  between  man  and  man,
and  the  study  of  the  law,. which  is  equivalent  to  them  all "
(Peak.  i.  I).

And  literally  "  equivalent  to  them  all  "  was  such  study  to
the  Jew.  The  circumstances  of  the  times  forced  him  to  learn
Greek,  perhaps  also  Latin,  so  much  as  was  necessary  for
intercourse;  and  to  tolerate  at  least  the  Greek  translation  of
the  Scriptures,  and  the  use  of  any  language  in  the  daily
prayers  of  the  Shema,  of  the  eighteen  benedictions,  and  of
the  grace  after  meat.2  But  the  blessing  of  the  priests  might
not  be  spoken,  nor  the  phylacteries  nor  the  Mesusah  written,

1  The  capital  sum,  as  it  were.

2  These  are  the  oldest  elements  of  the  Jewish  liturgy.


126  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

in  other  than  the  Hebrew  language  (Megil.  i.  8 ;  Sotah,  vii.  1,2);
while  heathen  science  and  literature  were  absolutely  pro-
hibited. To  this,  and  not  to  the  mere  learning  of  Greek,
which  must  have  been  almost  necessary  for  daily  life,  refer
such  prohibitions  as  that  traced  to  the  time  of  Titus  (Sotah,
ix.  14),  forbidding  a  man  to  teach  his  son  Greek.  The
Talmud  itself  (Men.  99  b)  furnishes  a  clever  illustration  of
this,  when,  in  reply  to  the  question  of  a  younger  Rabbi,
whether,  since  he  knew  the  whole  "  Thorah "  (the  law),  he
might  be  allowed  to  study  "  Greek  wisdom,"  his  uncle
reminded  him  of  the  words  (Josh.  i.  8),  "Thou  shalt  meditate
therein  day  and  night."  u  Go,  then,  and  consider,"  said  the
older  Rabbi, "  which  is  the  hour  that  is  neither  of  the  day  nor
of  the  night,  and  in  it  thou  mayest  study  Grecian  wisdom."
This,  then,  was  one  source  of  danger  averted.  Then,  as  for
the  occupations  of  ordinary  life,  it  was  indeed  quite  true  that
every  Jew  was  bound  to  learn  some  trade  or  business.  But
this  was  not  to  divert  him  from  study  ;  quite  the  contrary.  It
was  regarded  as  a  profanation — or  at  least  declared  such1 — to
make  use  of  one's  learning  for  secular  purposes,  whether  of
gain  or  of  honour.  The  great  Hillel  had  it  (Ab.  i.  13):  "  He
who  serves  himself  by  the  crown  (the  *  Thorah ')  shall  fade
away."  To  this  Rabbi  Zadok  added  the  warning,  "Make
study  neither  a  crown  by  which  to  shine,  nor  yet  a  spade  with
which  to  dig" — the  Mishnah  inferring  that  such  attempts
would  only  lead  to  the  shortening  of  life  (Ab.  iv.  5).  All  was
to  be  merely  subsidiary  to  the  one  grand  object  ;  the  one  was
of  time,  the  other  of  eternity  ;  the  one  of  the  body,  the  other

1  Such,  at  any  rate,  was  the  profession ;  the  practice,  it  is  to  be  feared,  was
often  far  different,  as  the  reader  of  the  New  Testament  will  infer  from  Mark  xii.
40  ;  Luke  xvi.  14 ;  xx.  47.


Subjects  of  Study.  127

of  the  soul  j1  and  its  use  was  only  to  sustain  the  body,  so  as
to  give  free  scope  to  the  soul  on  its  upward  path.  Every
science  also  merged  in  theology.  Some  were  not  so  much
sciences  as  means  of  livelihood,  such  as  medicine  and  surgery ;
others  were  merely  handmaidens  to  theology.  Jurisprudence
was  in  reality  a  kind  of  canon  law ;  mathematics  and
astronomy  were  subservient  to  the  computations  of  the
Jewish  calendar ;  literature  existed  not  outside  theological
pursuits  ;  and  as  for  history,  geography,  or  natural  studies,
although  we  mark,  in  reference  to  the  latter,  a  keenness  of
observation  which  often  led  instinctively  to  truth,  we  meet
with  so  much  ignorance,  and  with  so  many  gross  mistakes
and  fables,  as  almost  to  shake  the  belief  of  the  student  in
the  trustworthiness  of  any  Rabbinical  testimony.

From  what  has  been  stated,  three  inferences  will  be  gathered,
all  of  most  material  bearing  on  the  study  of  the  New  Testa-
ment. It  will  be  seen  how  a  mere  knowledge  of  the  law  came
to  hold  such  place  of  almost  exclusive  importance  that  its
successful  prosecution  seemed  to  be  well-nigh  all  in  all.
Again,  it  is  easy  now  to  understand  why  students  and  teachers
of  theology  enjoyed  such  exceptional  honour  (Matt,  xxiii
6,  7  ;  Mark  xii.  38,  39  ;  Luke  xi.  43  ;  xx.  46).  In  this  respect
the  testimonies  of  Onkelos,  in  his  paraphrastic  rendering  of
the  Scriptures,  of  the  oldest  "  Targumim,"  or  paraphrastic
commentaries,  of  the  Mishnah,  and  of  the  two  Talmuds,  are
not  only  unanimous,  but  most  extravagant.  Not  only  are
miracles  supposed  to  be  performed  in  attestation  of  certain
Rabbis,  but  such  a  story  is  actually  ventured  upon  (Bab.  Mez.
86  a),  as  that  on  the  occasion  of  a  discussion  in  the  academy
of  .heaven,  when  the  Almighty  and  His  angels  were  of

1  There  is  here  a  most  instructive  passage  in  Kidd.  iv.  14.


128  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

different  opinions  in  regard  to  a  special  point  of  law,  a  Rabbi
famed  for  his  knowledge  of  that  subject  was  summoned  up
by  the  angel  of  death  to  decide  the  matter  between  them  !
The  story  is  altogether  too  blasphemous  for  details,  and
indeed  the  whole  subject  is  too  wide  for  treatment  in  this  con-
nection. If  such  was  the  exalted  position  of  a  Rabbi,  this
direction  of  the  Mishnah  seems  quite  natural,  that  in  case  of
loss,  of  difficulties,  or  of  captivity,  a  teacher  was  to  be  cared
for  before  a  father,  since  to  the  latter  we  owed  only  our
existence  in  this  world,  but  to  the  former  the  life  of  the
world  to  come  (Bab.  Mez.  ii.  n).  It  is  curious  how  in  this
respect  also  Roman  Catholicism  and  Pharisaism  arrive  at  the
same  ultimate  results.  Witness  this  saying  of  the  celebrated
Rabbi,  who  flourished  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  whose
authority  is  almost  absolute  among  the  Jews.  The  following
is  his  glossary  on  Deut.  xvii.  1 1 :  "  Even  if  a  Rabbi  were  to
teach  that  your  left  hand  was  the  right,  and  your  right  hand
the  left,  you  are  bound  to  obey."

The  third  inference  which  the  reader  will  draw  is  as  to  the
influence  which  such  views  must  have  exercised  upon  educa-
tion, alike  at  home  and  in  schools.  It  is  no  doubt  only  the
echo  of  the  most  ancient  mode  of  congratulating  a  parent
when  to  this  day  those  who  are  present  at  a  circumcision,  and
also  the  priest  when  the  first-born  is  redeemed  from  him,  utter
this :  "  As  this  child  has  been  joined  to  the  covenant "  (or,  as
the  case  may  be,  "attained  this  redemption"),  "  so  may  it  also
be  to  him  in  reference  to  the  '  thorah/  the  '  chuppah,'1  and  to
good  works."  The  wish  marks  with  twofold  emphasis  the
life  that  is  to  come,  as  compared  with  the  life  that  now  is.

1  The  marriage-baldacchino,  under  which  the  regular  marriage  ceremony  is
performed.


Subjects  of  Study.  129

This  quite  agrees  with  the  account  of  Josephus,  who  contrasts
the  heathen  festivals  at  the  birth  of  children  with  the  Jewish
enactments  by  which  children  were  from  their  very  infancy
nourished  up  in  the  laws  of  God  (Ag.  Apion,  i.  8,  12  ;  ii.  18,
25,  26).

There  can  be  no  question  that,  according  to  the  law  of
Moses,  the  early  education  of  a  child  devolved  upon  the
father ;  of  course,  always  bearing  in  mind  that  his  first  train-
ing would  be  the  mother's  (Deut.  xi.  19,  and  many  other
passages).  If  the  father  were  not  capable  of  elementary
teaching,  a  stranger  would  be  employed.  Passing  over  the
Old  Testament  period,  we  may  take  it  that,  in  the  days  of
Christ,  home-teaching  ordinarily  began  when  the  child  was
about  three  years  old.  There  is  reason  for  believing  that,  even
before  this,  that  careful  training  of  the  memory  commenced,
which  has  ever  since  been  one  of  the  mental  characteristics  of
the  Jewish  nation.1  Verses  of  Scripture,  benedictions,  wise
sayings,  etc.,  were  impressed  on  the  child,  and  mnemonic
rules  devised  to  facilitate  the  retention  of  what  was  so
acquired.  We  can  understand  the  reason  of  this  from  the
religious  importance  attaching  to  the  exact  preservation  of  the
very  words  of  tradition.  The  Talmud  describes  the  beau  ideal
of  a  student  when  it  compares  him  to  a  well-plastered  cistern,
which  would  not  let  even  a  single  drop  escape.  Indeed,
according  to  the  Mishnah,  he  who  from  negligence  "  forgets
any  one  thing  in  his  study  of  the  Mishnah,  Scripture  imputes
it  to  him  as  if  he  had  forfeited  his  life;"  the  reference  here
being  to  Deut.  iv.  9  (Ab.  iii.  10).  And  so  we  may  attach  some

1  Gfrorer,  Jahrh.  d.  Heils,  vol.  i.  p.  170,  proposes  as  a  curious  test  that  all
copies  of  the  Talmud  should  be  destroyed,  feeling  sure  that  any  twelve  learned
Rabbis  would  be  able  to  restore  it  verbatim  from  memory  !

K


130  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

credit  even  to  Josephus'  boast  about  his  "wonderful  memory"
(Life,  2).

In  teaching  to  read,  the  alphabet  was  to  be  imparted  by
drawing  the  letters  on  a  board,  till  the  child  became  familiar
with  them.  Next,  the  teacher  would  point  in  the  copy  read
with  his  finger,  or,  still  better,  with  a  style,  to  keep  up  the
attention  of  the  pupil.  None  but  well-corrected  manu-
scripts were  to  be  used,  since,  as  was  rightly  said,  mis-
takes impressed  upon  the  young  mind  were  afterwards  not
easily  corrected.  To  acquire  fluency,  the  child  should  be
made  to  read  aloud.  Special  care  was  to  be  bestowed  on  the
choice  of  good  language,  in  which  respect,  as  we  know,  the
inhabitants  of  Judaea  far  excelled  those  of  Galilee,  who  failed
not  only  in  elegance  of  diction,  but  even  in  their  pronuncia-
tion. At  five  years  of  age  the  Hebrew  Bible  was  to  be
begun  ;  commencing,  however,  not  with  the  book  of  Genesis,
but  with  that  of  Leviticus.  This  not  (as  Altingius  suggests
in  his  Academ.  Dissert,  p.  335)  to  teach  the  child  his  guilt,
and  the  need  of  justification,  but  rather  because  Leviticus
contained  those  ordinances  which  it  behoved  a  Jew  to  know
as  early  as  possible.  The  history  of  Israel  would  probably
have  been  long  before  imparted  orally,  as  it  was  continually
repeated  on  all  festive  occasions,  as  well  as  in  the  synagogue.

It  has  been  stated  in  a  former  chapter  that  writing  was
not  so  common  an  accomplishment  as  reading.  Undoubtedly,
the  Israelites  were  familiar  with  it  from  the  very  earliest
period  of  their  history,  whether  or  not  they  had  generally
acquired  the  art  in  Egypt.  We  read  of  the  graving  of  words
on  the  gems  of  the  high-priest's  breastplate,  of  the  record  of
the  various  genealogies  of  the  tribes,  etc. ;  while  such  passages
as  Deut  vi.  9  ;  xi.  20 ;  xxiv.  I,  3,  imply  that  the  art  was  not


Subjects  of  Study.  131

confined  to  the  priesthood  (Num.  v.  23),  but  was  known  to
the  people  generally.  Then  we  are  told  of  copies  of  the  law
(Deut.  xvii.  18 ;  xxviii.  58,  etc.),  while  in  Josh.  x.  13  we  have
a  reference  to  a  work  called  "  the  book  of  Jasher."  In  Josh,
xviii.  9  we  find  mention  of  a  description  of  Palestine  "  in  a
book,"  and  in  xxiv.  26  of  what  Joshua  "  wrote  in  the  book  0**
the  law  of  God."  From  Judges  viii.  14  (margin)  it  would  appe£7~
that  in  the  time  of  Gideon  the  art  of  writing  was  very  generally
known.  After  that,  instances  occur  so  frequently  and  applied
to  so  many  relationships,  that  the  reader  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment can  have  no  difficulty  in  tracing  the  progress  of  the  art.
This  is  not  the  place  to  follow  the  subject  farther,  nor  to
describe  the  various  materials  employed  at  that  time,  nor  the
mode  of  lettering.  At  a  much  later  period  the  common
mention  of  "scribes"  indicates  the  popular  need  of  such  a
class.  ^We  can  readily  understand  that  the  Oriental  mind
would  delight  in  writing  enigmatically,  that  is,  conveying  by
certain  expressions  a  meaning  to  the  initiated  which  the
ordinary  reader  would  miss,  or  which,  at  any  rate,  would  leave
the  explanation  to  the  exercise  of  ingenuity.  Partially  in  the
same  class  we  might  reckon  the  custom  of  designating  a
word  by  its  initial  letter.  All  these  were  very  early  in  practice,
and  the  subject  has  points  of  considerable  interest.  Another
matter  deserves  more  serious  attention.  It  will  scarcely  be
credited  how  general  the  falsification  of  signatures  and  docu-
ments had  become.  Josephus  mentions  it  (Ant.  xvi.  10,  4) ;
and  we  know  that  St.  Paul  was  obliged  to  warn  the  Thessa-
lonians  against  it  (2  Thess.  ii.  2),  and  at  last  to  adopt  the
device  of  signing  every  letter  which  came  from  himself.  There
are  scarcely  any  ancient  Rabbinical  documents  which  have  not
been  interpolated  by  later  writers,  or,  as  we  might  euphemis-


132  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

tically  call  it,  been  recast  and  re-edited.  In  general,  it  is  not
difficult  to  discover  such  additions ;  although  the  vigilance
and  acuteness  of  the  critical  scholar  are  specially  required  in
this  direction  to  guard  against  rash  and  unwarrantable  in-
ferences. But  without  entering  on  such  points,  it  may  interest
the  reader  to  know  what  writing  materials  were  employed  in
New  Testament  times.  In  Egypt  red  ink  seems  to  have
been  used ;  but  assuredly  the  ink  mentioned  in  the  New
Testament  was  black,  as  even  the  term  indicates  ("  melan,"
3  Cor.  iii.  3  ;  2  John  12;  3  John  13).  Josephus  speaks  of
writing  in  gold  letters  (Ant.  xii.  2,  n)  ;  and  in  the  Mishnah
(Meg.  ii.  2)  we  read  of  mixed  colours,  of  red,  of  sympathetic
ink,  and  of  certain  chemical  compositions.  Reed  quills  are
mentioned  in  3  John  13.  The  best  of  these  came  from
Egypt ;  and  the  use  of  a  penknife  would  of  course  be  indis-
pensable. Paper  (from  the  Egyptian  "  papyrus ")  is  men-
tioned in  2  John  12  ;  parchment  in  2  Tim.  iv.  13.  Of  this
there  were  three  kinds,  according  as  the  skin  was  used  either
whole,  or  else  split  up  into  an  outer  and  an  inner  skin.
The  latter  was  used  for  the  Mesusah.  Shorter  memoranda
were  made  on  tablets,  which  in  the  Mishnah  (SJiab.  xii.  4)
bear  the  same  name  as  in  Luke  i.  63.

Before  passing  to  an  account  of  elementary  schools,  it  may
be  well,  once  and  for  all,  to  say  that  the  Rabbis  did  not
approve  of  the  same  amount  of  instruction  being  given  to
girls  as  to  boys.  More  particularly  they  disapproved  of  their
engaging  in  legal  studies — partly  because  they  considered
woman's  mission  and  duties  as  lying  in  other  directions,
partly  because  the  subjects  were  necessarily  not  always  suit-
able for  the  other  sex,  partly  because  of  the  familiar  inter-
course between  the  sexes  to  which  such  occupations  would


Subjects  of  Study.  ,113-

Iiave  necessarily  led,  and  finally — shall  we  say  it  ? — because
the  Rabbis  regarded  woman's  mind  as  not  adapted  for  such
investigations.  The  unkindest  thing,  perhaps,  which  they  said
on  this  score  was,  "Women  are  of  a  light  mind;"  though  in  its
oft  repetition  the  saying  almost  reads  like  a  semi-jocular  way
of  cutting  short  a  subject  on  which  discussion  is  disagreeable.
However,  instances  of  Rabbinically  learned  women  do  occur.
What  their  Biblical  knowledge  and  what  their  religious  in-
fluence was,  we  learn  no^  only  from  the  Rabbis,  but  from  the
New  Testament.  Their  attendance  at  all  public  and  domestic
festivals,  and  in  the  synagogues,  and  the  circumstance  that
certain  injunctions  and  observances  of  Rabbinic  origin  de-
volved upon  them  also,  prove  that,  though  not  learned  in  the
law,  there  must  have  been  among  them  not  a  few  who,  like
Lois  and  Eunice,  could  train  a  child  in  the  knowledge  of  the
Scripture,  or,  like  Priscilla,  be  qualified  to  explain  even  to  an
Apollos  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly.

Supposing,  then,  a  child  to  be  so  far  educated  at  home ;
suppose  him,  also,  to  be  there  continually  taught  the  com-
mandments and  observances,  and,  as  the  Talmud  expressly
states,  to  be  encouraged  to  repeat  the  prayers  aloud,  so  as  to
accustom  him  to  it.  At  six  years  of  age  he  would  be  sent  to
school ;  not  to  an  academy,  or  "  beth  hammedrash,"  which  he
would  only  attend  if  he  proved  apt  and  promising ;  far  less  to
the  class-room  of  a  great  Rabbi,  or  the  discussions  of  the
Sanhedrim,  which  marked  a  very  advanced  stage  of  study.
We  are  here  speaking  only  of  primary  or  elementary  schools,
such  as  even  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  were  attached  to  every
synagogue  in  the  land.  Passing  over  the  supposed  or  real
Biblical  notices  of  schools,  and  confining  our  attention  strictly
to  the  period  ending  with  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  we


X34     J  Sketches  of  JewisJi  Life.

have  first  a  notice  in  the  Talmud  (Bab.  B.  21,  £),  ascribing  to
Ezra  an  ordinance,  that  as  many  schoolmasters  as  chose  should
be  allowed  to  establish  themselves  in  any  place,  and  that
those  who  had  formerly  been  settled  there  might  not  interfere
with  them.  In  all  likelihood  this  notice  should  not  be  taken
in  its  literal  sense,  but  as  an  indication  that  the  encourage-
ment of  schools  and  of  education  engaged  the  attention  of
Ezra  and  of  his  successors.  Of  the  Grecianised  academies
which  the  wicked  high-priest  Jason  tried  to  introduce  in
Jerusalem  (2  Mace.  iv.  12,  13)  we  do  not  speak,  because  they
were  anti-Jewish  in  their  spirit,  and  that  to  such  extent,  that
the  Rabbis,  in  order  to  "  make  a  hedge,"  forbade  all  gymnastic
exercises.  The  farther  history  and  progress  of  Jewish  schools
are  traced  in  the  following  passage  of  the  Talmud  (Bab.  B.  21,
a) :  "  If  any  one  has  merit,  and  deserves  that  his  name  should
be  kept  in  remembrance,  it  is  Joshua,  the  son  of  Gamaliel.
Without  him  the  law  would  have  fallen  into  oblivion  in  Israel.
For  they  used  to  rest  on  this  saying  of  the  law  (Deut.  xi.  19),
*Ye  shall  teach  them.'  Afterwards  it  was  ordained  that
masters  be  appointed  at  Jerusalem  for  the  instruction  of
youth,  as  it  is  written  (Isa.  ii.  3),  *  Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth
the  law.'  But  even  so  the  remedy  was  not  effectual,  only  those
who  had  fathers  being  sent  to  school,  and  the  rest  being
neglected.  Hence  it  was  arranged  that  Rabbis  should  be
appointed  in  every  district,  and  that  lads  of  sixteen  or  seven-
teen years  should  be  sent  to  their  academies.  But  this
institution  failed,  since  every  lad  ran  away  if  he  was  chastised
by  his  master.  At  last  Joshua  the  son  of  Gamaliel  arranged,
that  in  every  province  and  in  every  town  schoolmasters  be
appointed,  who  should  take  charge  of  all  boys  from  six  or
seven  years  of  age."  We  may  add  at  once,  that  the  Joshua


Subjects  of  Study.  135

here  spoken  of  was  probably  the  high-priest  of  that  name
who  flourished  before  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  and  that
unquestionably  this  farther  organisation  implied  at  least  the
existence  of  elementary  schools  at  an  earlier  period.
i  Every  place,  then,  which  numbered  twenty-five  boys  of  a
suitable  age,  or,  according  to  Maimonides,  one  hundred  and
twenty  families,  was  bound  to  appoint  a  schoolmaster.  More
than  twenty-five  pupils  or  thereabouts  he  was  not  allowed  to
teach  in  a  class.  If  there  were  forty,  he  had  to  employ  an
assistant ;  if  fifty,  the  synagogue  authorities  appointed  two
teachers.  This  will  enable  us  to  understand  the  statement,
no  doubt  greatly  exaggerated,  that  at  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem  there  were  no  fewer  than  four  hundred  and  eighty
schools  in  the  metropolis.  From  another  passage,  which
ascribes  the  fall  of  the  Jewish  state  to  the  neglect  of  the  edu-
cation of  children,  we  may  infer  what  importance  popular
opinion  attached  to  it.  But  indeed,  to  the  Jew,  child-life  was
something  peculiarly  holy,  and  the  duty  of  filling  it  with
thoughts  of  God  specially  sacred.  It  almost  seems  as  if  the
people  generally  had  retained  among  them  the  echo  of  our
Lord's  saying,  that  their  angels  continually  behold  the  face  of
our  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  Hence  the  religious  care  con-
nected with  education.  The  grand  object  of  the  teacher  was
moral  as  well  as  intellectual  training.  To  keep  children  from
all  intercourse  with  the  vicious  ;  to  suppress  all  feelings  of
bitterness,  even  though  wrong  had  been  done  to  one's
parents  j1  to  punish  all  real  wrong-doing  ;  not  to  prefer  one
child  to  another ;  rather  to  show  sin  in  its  repulsiveness  than

1  To  this  day  there  is  this  beautiful  prayer  in  the  Jewish  liturgy:  "In  regard
to  those  who  curse,  let  my  soul  be  silent  j  yea,  let  my  soul  be  like  the  dust
towards  all"


136  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

to  predict  what  punishment  would  follow,  either  in  this  or  the
next  world,  so  as  not  to  "  discourage  "  the  child — such  are
some  of  the  rules  laid  down.1  A  teacher  was  not  even  to
promise  a  child  anything  which  he  did  not  mean  to  perform,
lest  its  mind  be  familiarised  with  falsehood.  Everything  that
might  call  up  disagreeable  or  indelicate  thoughts  was  to  be
carefully  avoided.  The  teacher  must  not  lose  patience  if  his
pupil  understood  not  readily,  but  rather  make  the  lesson  more
plain.  He  might,  indeed,  and  he  should,  punish  when  neces-
sary, and,  as  one  of  the  Rabbis  put  it,  treat  the  child  like  a
young  heifer  whose  burden  was  daily  increased.  But  excessive
severity  was  to  be  avoided  ;  and  we  are  told  of  one  teacher
who  was  actually  dismissed  from  office  for  this  reason.  Where
possible,  try  kindness  ;  and  if  punishment  was  to  be  adminis-
tered, let  the  child  be  beaten  with  a  strap,  but  never  with  a
rod.  At  ten  the  child  began  to  study  the  Mishnah  ;  at  fifteen
he  must  be  ready  for  the  Talmud,  which  would  be  explained
to  him  in  a  more  advanced  academy.  If  after  three,  or  at
most  five,  years  of  tuition  the  child  had  not  made  decided
progress,  there  was  little  hope  of  his  attaining  to  eminence.
In  the  study  of  the  Bible  the  pupil  was  to  proceed  from  the
book  of  Leviticus  to  the  rest  of  the  Pentateuch,  thence  to  the
Prophets,  and  lastly  to  the  Hagiographa.  This  regulation
was  in  accordance  with  the  degree  of  value  which  the  Rabbis
attached  to  these  divisions  of  the  Bible.2  In  the  case  of
advanced  pupils  the  day  was  portioned  out — one  part  being
devoted  to  the  Bible,  the  other  two  to  the  Mishnah  and  the

1  The  references  here  are  too  numerous  to  be  given.  In  general,  compare
Hamburger,  Real.  Enc.  vol.  i.  p.  340;  my  History  of  the  Jewish  Nation,  p.  298}
and  the  pamphlet  by  Ehrmann,  Beitr.  zur  Gesch.  d.  Schulen.

*  The  full  explanation  of  this  must  be  reserved  to  a  larger  work.


Subjects  of  Study.  137

Talmud.  Every  parent  was  also  advised  to  have  his  child
taught  swimming.

It  has  already  been  stated  that  in  general  the  school  was  held
in  the  synagogue.  Commonly  its  teacher  was  the  "  chazan,"
or  "  minister  "  (Luke  iv.  20)  ;  by  which  expression  we  are  to
understand  not  a  spiritual  office,  but  something  like  that  of  a
beadle.  This  officer  was  salaried  by  the  congregation  ;  nor
was  he  allowed  to  receive  fees  from  his  pupils,  lest  he  should
show  favour  to  the  rich.  The  expenses  were  met  by  voluntary
and  charitable  contributions  ;  and  in  case  of  deficiency  the
most  distinguished  Rabbis  did  not  hesitate  to  go  about  and
collect  aid  from  the  wealthy.  The  number  of  hours  during
which  the  junior  classes  were  kept  in  school  was  limited.  As
the  close  air  of  the  school-room  might  prove  injurious  during
the  heat  of  the  day,  lessons  were  intermitted  between  ten
A.M.  and  three  P.M.  For  similar  reasons,  only  four  hours
were  allowed  for  instruction  between  the  seventeenth  of
Thamuz  and  the  ninth  of  Ab  (about  July  and  August),  and
teachers  were  forbidden  to  chastise  their  pupils  during  these
months.  The  highest  honour  and  distinction  attached  to  the
office  of  a  teacher,  if  worthily  discharged.  Want  of  know-
ledge or  of  method  was  regarded  as  sufficient  cause  for
removing  a  teacher ;  but  experience  was  always  deemed  a
better  qualification  than  mere  acquirements.  No  teacher  was
employed  who  was  not  a  married  man.  To  discourage  un-
wholesome rivalry,  and  to  raise  the  general  educational
standard,  parents  were  prohibited  from  sending  their  children
to  other  than  the  schools  of  their  own  towns.

A  very  beautiful  trait  was  the  care  bestowed  on  the  children
of  the  poor  and  on  orphans.  In  the  Temple  there  was  a
special  receptacle — that  "of  the  secret" — for  contributions,


138  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

which  were  privately  applied  for  the  education  of  the  children
of  the  pious  poor.  To  adopt  and  bring  up  an  orphan  was
regarded  as  specially  a  "  good  work."  This  reminds  us  of
the  apostolic  description  of  a  "  widow  indeed,"  as  one  "  well
reported  for  good  works ;  "  who  "  had  brought  up  children,
lodged  strangers,  washed  the  saints'  feet,  relieved  the  afflicted,
diligently  followed  every  good  work"  (i  Tim.  v.  10).  Indeed,
orphans  were  the  special  charge  of  the  whole  congregation —
not  thrust  into  poor-houses, — and  the  parochial  authorities
were  even  bound  to  provide  a  fixed  dowry  for  female  orphans.
Such  were  the  surroundings,  and  such  the  atmosphere,
in  which  Jesus  of  Nazareth  moved  while  tabernacling  among
men.


CHAPTER    IX.

MOTHERS,   DAUGHTERS,   AND  WIVES  IN   ISRAEL.

IN  order  accurately  to  understand  the  position  of  woman
in  Israel,  it  is  only  necessary  carefully  to  peruse  the  New
Testament.  The  picture  of  social  life  there  presented  gives
a  full  view  of  the  place  which  she  held  in  private  and  in
public  -life.  Here  we  do  not  find  that  separation,  so  common
among  Orientals  at  all  times,  but  woman  mingles  freely
with  others  both  at  home  and  abroad.  So  far  from  suffering
under  social  inferiority,  she  takes  influential  and  often  leading
part  in  all  movements,  specially  those  of  a  religious  character.
Above  all,  we1  are  wholly  spared  those  sickening  details  of  pri-
vate and  public  immorality  with  which  contemporary  classical
literature  abounds.  Among  Israel  woman  was  pure,  the  home
happy,  and  the  family  hallowed  by  a  religion  which  consisted
not  only  in  public  services,  but  entered  into  daily  life,  and
embraced  in  its  observances  every  member  of  the  household.
It  was  so  not  only  in  New  Testament  times  but  always  in
Israel.  St.  Peter's  reference  to  "  the  holy  women  "  "  in  the  old
time"  (i  Pet.  iii.  5)  is  thoroughly  in  accordance  with  Tal-
mudical  views.  Indeed,  his  quotation  of  Gen.  xviii.  12,  and
its  application  :  "  Even  as  Sara  obeyed  Abraham,  calling


140  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

him  lord,"  occur  in  precisely  the  same  manner  in  Rabbinical
writings  (Tanch.  28,  6),  where  her  respect  and  obedience  are
likewise  set  forth  as  a  pattern  to  her  daughters.1

Some  further  details  may  illustrate  the  matter  better  than
arguments.  The  creation  of  woman  from  the  rib  of  Adam
is  thus  commented  on  :2  "  It  is  as  if  Adam  had  exchanged
a  pot  of  earth  for  a  precious  jewel."  This,  although  Jewish
wit  caustically  had  it :  "  God  has  cursed  woman,  yet  all  the
world  runs  after  her  ;  He  has  cursed  the  ground,  yet  all  the
world  lives  of  it."  In  what  reverence  "  the  four  mothers,"
as  the  Rabbis  designate  Sarah,  Rebekah,  Leah,  and  Rachel,
were  held,  and  what  influence  they  exercised  in  patriarchal
history,  no  attentive  reader  of  Scripture  can  fail  to  notice.  And
as  we  follow  on  the  sacred  story,  Miriam,  who  had  originally
saved  Moses,  leads  the  song  of  deliverance  on  the  other  side
of  the  flood,  and  her  influence,  though  not  always  for  good,
continued  till  her  death  (compare  Micah  vi.  4).  Then  "  the
women  whose  heart  stirred  them  up  in  wisdom "  contribute
to  the  rearing  of  the  Tabernacle;3  Deborah  works  deliverance,
and  judgeth  in  Israel ;  and  the  piety  of  Manoah's  wife  is  at
least  as  conspicuous,  and  more  intelligent,  than  her  husband's
(Judg.  xiii.  23).  So  also  is  that  of  the  mother  of  Samuel.
In  the  times  of  the  kings  the  praises  of  Israel's  maidens  stir

1  The  following  illustration  also  occurs :  A  certain  wise  woman  said  to  her
daughter  before  her  marriage  :  "  My  child,  stand  before  thy  husband  and  minister
to  him.  If  thou  wilt  act  as  his  maiden  he  will  be  thy  slave,  and  honour  thee  as  his
mistress ;  but  if  thou  exalt  thyself  against  him,  he  will  be  thy  master,  and  thou
shalt  become  vile  in  his  eyes,  like  one  of  the  maidservants."

*  Shab.  23.

8  There  is  a  Jewish  tradition  that  the  women  had  contributed  of  their  substance
to  the  Tabernacle,  but  refused  to  do  so  for  making  the  golden  calf,  which  is  deduced
from  the  account  in  Ex.  xxxii.  2  compared  with  verse  3.


Mothers,  Daughters,  and  Wives  in  Israel.     141

the  jealousy  of  Saul ;  Abigail  knows  how  to  avert  the
danger  of  her  husband's  folly  ;  the  wise  woman  of  Tekoah  is
sent  for  to  induce  the  king  to  fetch  his  banished  home ;  and
the  conduct  of  a  woman  "  in  her  wisdom  "  puts  an  end  to  the
rebellion  of  Sheba.  Later  on,  the  constant  mention  of  queen
mothers,  and  their  frequent  interference  in  the  government,
shows  their  position.  Such  names  as  that  of  Huldah  the
prophetess,  and  the  idyllic  narrative  of  the  Shunammite,  will
readily  occur  to  the  memory.  The  story  of  a  woman's
devotion  forms  the  subject  of  the  Book  of  Ruth  ;  that  of  her
pure  and  faithful  love,  the  theme  or  the  imagery  of  the  Song
of  Songs  ;  that  of  her  courage  and  devotion  the  groundwork
of  the  Book  of  Esther :  while  her  worth  and  virtues  are
enumerated  in  the  closing  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs.
Again,  in  the  language  of  the  prophets  the  people  of  God
are  called  "  the  daughter,"  "  the  virgin  daughter  of  Zion,"
"  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem,"  "  the  daughter  of  Judah,"  etc.  ;
and  their  relationship  to  God  is  constantly  compared  to  that
of  the  married  state.  The  very  terms  by  which  woman  is
named  in  the  Old  Testament  are  significant.  If  the  man
is  Isk,  his  wife  is  Ishah,  simply  his  equal  ;  if  the  husband
is  Gevery  the  riiler,  the  woman  is,  in  her  own  domain,  Gevirah
and  Gevereth,  the  mistress  (as  frequently  in  the  history  of
Sarah  and  in  other  passages),  or  else  the  dweller  at  home
(Nevath  bayith,  Ps.  Ixviii.  I2).1  Nor  is  it  otherwise  in  New

1  Similar  expressions  are  Sarah  and  Shiddak,  both  Irom  roots  meaning  to  rule.
Nor  is  this  inconsistent  with  the  use  of  the  word  Baal,  to  marry,  and  Beulah,  the
married  one,  from  Baal,  a  lord— even  as  Sarah  "called  Abraham  lord"  (i  Pet.
iii.  6,  the  expression  used  of  her  to  Abimelech,  Gen.  xx.  3,  being  BeulaJi).  Of
course  it  is  not  meant  that  these  are  the  only  words  for  females.  But  the  others,
•mch  as  Bath  and  Naarah,  are  either  simply  feminine  terminations,  or  else,  as
Bethulah,  Levush,  Nekevah,  Almah,  Rachem,  descriptive  of  their  physical  state.


142  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Testament  times.  The  ministry  of  woman  to  our  blessed
Lord,  and  in  the  Church,  has  almost  become  proverbial.
Her  position  there  marks  really  not  a  progress  upon,  but  the
full  carrying  out  of,  the  Old  Testament  idea ;  or,  to  put  the
matter  in  another  light,  we  ask  no  better  than  that  any  one
who  is  acquainted  with  classical  antiquity  should  compare
what  he  reads  of  a  Dorcas,  of  the  mother  of  Mark,  of  Lydia,
Priscilla,  Phcebe,  Lois,  or  Eunice,  with  what  he  Jcnows  of  the
noble  women  of  Greece  and  Rome  at  that  period.

Of  course,  against  all  this  may  be  set  the  permission  of
polygamy,  which  undoubtedly  was  in  force  at  the  time  of  our
Lord,  and  the  ease  with  which  divorce  might  be  obtained.  In
reference  to  both  these,  however,  it  must  be  remembered  that
they  were  temporary  concessions  to  "  the  hardness  "  of  the
people's  heart.  For,  not  only  must  the  circumstances  of  the
times  and  the  moral  state  of  the  Jewish  and  of  neighbouring
nations  be  taken  into  account,  but  there  were  progressive
stages  of  spiritual  development.  If  these  had  not  been  taken
into  account,  the  religion  of  the  Old  Testament  would  have
been  unnatural  and  an  impossibility.  Suffice  it,  that  "from
the  beginning  it  was  not  so,"  nor  yet  intended  to  be  so  in
the  end — the  intermediate  period  thus  marking  the  gradual
progress  from  the  perfectness  of  the  idea  to  the  perfectness
of  its  realisation.  Moreover,  it  is  impossible  to  read  the
Old,  and  still  more  the  New  Testament  without  gathering
from  it  the  conviction,  that  polygamy  was  not  the  rule
but  the  rare  exception,  so  far  as  the  people  generally
were  concerned.  Although  the  practice  in  reference  to
divorce  was  certainly  more  lax,  even  the  Rabbis  sur-
rounded it  with  so  many  safeguards  that,  in  point  of
fact,  it  must  in  many  cases  b*ve  been  difficult  of  accom-


Mothers,  Daughters,  and  Wives  in  Israel.     143

plishment.  In  general,  the  whole  tendency  of  the  Mosaic
legislation,  and  even  more  explicitly  that  ot  later  Rabbinical
ordinances,  was  in  the  direction  of  recognising  the  rights  of
woman,  with  a  scrupulousness  which  reached  down  even  to
the  Jewish  slave,  and  a  delicacy  that  guarded  her  most
sensitive  feelings.  Indeed,  we  feel  warranted  in  saying,  that
in  cases  of  dispute  the  law  generally  leant  to  her  side.  Of
divorce  we  shall  have  to  speak  in  the  sequel.  But  what  the
religious  views  and  feelings  both  about  it  and  monogamy
were  at  the  time  of  Malachi,  appears  from  the  pathetic
description  of  the  altar  of  God  as  covered  with  the  tears  of .
"the  wife  of  youth,"  "the  wife  of  thy  covenant,"  "  thy  com-
panion," who  had  been  "  put  away  "  or  "  treacherously  dealt "
with  (Mai.  ii.  13  to  end).  The  whole  is  so  beautifully  para-
phrased by  the  Rabbis  that  we  subjoin  it : 1

"If  death  hath  snatched  from  thee  the  wife  of  youth,
It  is  as  if  the  sacred  city  were,
And  e'en  the  Temple,  in  thy  pilgrim  days,
Defiled,  laid  low,  and  levelled  with  the  dust
The  man  who  harshly  sends  from  him
His  first-woo'd.  wife,  the  loving  wife  of  youth,
For  him  the  very  altar  of  the  Lord
Sheds  forth  its  tears  of  bitter  agony."

Where  the  social  intercourse  between  the  sexes  was  nearly
as  unrestricted  as  among  ourselves,  so  far  as  consistent  with
Eastern  manners,  it  would,  of  course,  be  natural  for  a  young
man  to  make  personal  choice  of  his  bride.  Of  this  Scripture
affords  abundant  evidence.  But,  at  any  rate,  the  woman
had,  in  case  of  betrothal  or  marriage,  to  give  her  own  free
and  expressed  consent,  without  which  a  union  was  invalid.

1  After  the  elegant  poetical  version  of  Dr.  Sachs  (Stimmen  vom  Jordan  u.
Enphrat.  p.  347).  We  select  this  one  poetic  description  of  Jewish  wedded  love
and  respect  for  woman  from  among  many  that  might  be  given.


144  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Minors — in  the  case  of  girls  up  to  twelve  years  and  one  day
— might  be  betrothed  or  given  away  by  their  father.  In  that
case,  however,  they  had  afterwards  the  right  of  insisting  upon
divorce.  Of  course,  it  is  not  intended  to  convey  that  woman
attained  her  full  position  till  under  the  New  Testament.  But
this  is  only  to  repeat  what  may  be  said  of  almost  every  social
state  and  relationship.  Yet  it  is  most  marked  how  deeply  the
spirit  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  is  essentially  that  of  the
New  also,  had  in  this  respect  also  penetrated  the  life  of  Israel.
St.  Paul's  warning  (2  Cor.  vi.  14)  against  being  "  unequally
yoked  together,"  which  is  an  allegorical  application  of  Lev.
xix,  19 ;  Deut.  xxii.  10,  finds  to  some  extent  a  counterpart
in  mystical  Rabbinical  writings,1  where  the  last-mentioned
passage  is  expressly  applied  to  spiritually  unequal  marriages.
The  admonition  of  I  Cor.  vii.  39  to  marry  "  only  in  the  Lord,"
recalls  many  similar  Rabbinical  warnings,  from  which  we
select  the  most  striking.  Men,  we  are  told,2  are  wont  to
marry  for  one  of  four  reasons — for  passion,  wealth,  honour,  or
the  glory  of  God.  As  for  the  first-named  class  of  marriages,
their  issue  must  be  expected  to  be  "  stubborn  and  rebellious  "
sons,  as  we  may  gather  from  the  section  referring  to  such
following  upon  that  in  Deut.  xxi.  n.  In  regard  to  marriages
for  wealth,  we  are  to  learn  a  lesson  from  the  sons  of  Eli,  who
sought  to  enrich  themselves  in  such  manner,  but  of  whose
posterity  it  was  said  (i  Sam.  ii.  36)  that  they  should  "crouch
for  a  piece  of  silver  and  a  morsel  of  bread."  Of  marriages  for
the  sake  of  connection,  honour,  and  influence,  King  Jehoram
offered  a  warning,  who  became  King  Ahab's  son-in-law,  be-

1  The  somewhat  similar  reference  to  Lev.  xix.  19  in  PhUo.  de  Great.  Princ.
(ed  Francof.)  pp.   730,  731,  mentioned  in  Wetstein,  Nov.  Test.  ii.  p.  193,  docs
not  seem  sufficiently  parallel  for  quotation.

2  Yalkut  on  Deut.  xxi.  i>


Mothers,  Daughters,  and  Wives  in  Israel.     145

cause  that  monarch  had  seventy  sons,  whereas  upon  his  death
his  widow  Athaliah  "  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal "
(2  Kings  xi.  i).  But  far  otherwise  is  it  in  case  of  marriage
"in  the  name  of  heaven."  The  issue  of  such  will  be  children
who  "  preserve  Israel."  In  fact,  the  Rabbinical  references  to
marrying  "  in  the  name  of  heaven,"  or  "  for  the  name  of  God,"
— in  God  and  for  God— are  so  frequent  and  so  emphatic,  that
the  expressions  used  by  St.  Paul  must  have  come  familiarly
to  him.  Again,  much  that  is  said  in  I  Cor.  vii.  about  the
married  estate,  finds  striking  parallels  in  Talmudical  writings.
One  may  here  be  mentioned,  as  explaining  the  expression
(ver.  14) :"  Else  were  your  children  unclean  ;  but  now  are  they
holy."  Precisely  the  same  distinction  was  made  by  the  Rabbis
in  regard  to  proselytes,  whose  children,  if  begotten  before  their
conversion  to  Judaism,  were  said  to  be  "unclean;"  if  after
that  event  to  have  been  born  "  in  holiness,"  only  that,  among
the  Jews,  both  parents  required  to  profess  Judaism,  while
St.  Paul  argues  in  the  contrary  direction,  and  concerning  a
far  different  holiness  than  that  which  could  be  obtained
through  any  mere  outward  ceremony.

Some  further  details,  gathered  almost  at  random,  will  give
glimpses  of  Jewish  home  life  and  of  current  views.  It  was  by  a
not  uncommon,  though  irreverent,  mode  of  witticism,  that  two
forms  of  the  same  verb,  sounding  almost  alike,  were  made  to
express  opposite  experiences  of  marriage.  It  was  common
to  ask  a  newly-married  husband  :  "  Maza  or  Moze  ? " —
"  findeth"  or  "  found  ;"  the  first  expression  occurring  in  Prov.
xviii.  22,  the  second  in  Eccles.  vii.  26.  A  different  sentiment
is  the  following  from  the  Talmud  ( Yeb.  62  b  ;  Sank.  76  b),
the  similarity  of  which  to  Eph.  v.  28  will  be  immediately
recognised :  "  He  that  loveth  his  wife  as  his  own  body,

L


146  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

honoureth  her  more  than  his  own  body,  brings  up  his  children
in  the  right  way,  and  leads  them  in  it  to  full  age — of  him  the
Scripture  saith  :  '  Thou  shalt  know  that  thy  tabernacle  shall
be  in  peace  }  (Job  v.  24)."  Of  all  qualities  those  most  desired
in  woman  were  meekness,  modesty,  and  shamefacedness.
Indeed,  brawling,  gossip  in  the  streets,  and  immodest
behaviour  in  public  were  sufficient  grounds  for  divorce.  Of
course,  Jewish  women  would  never  have  attempted  "  teaching  "
in  the  synagogue,  where  they  occupied  a  place  separate  from
the  men — for  Rabbinical  study,  however  valued  for  the  male
sex,  was  disapproved  of  in  the  case  of  women.  Yet  this
direction  of  St.  Paul  (i  Tim.  ii.  12) :  "  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to
usurp  authority  over  the  man  "  findeth  some  kind  of  parallel  in
the  Rabbinical  saying  :  "  Whoever  allows  himself  to  be  ruled
by  his  wife,  shall  call  out,  and  no  one  will  make  answer  to  him."
It  is  on  similar  grounds  that  the  Rabbis  argue,  that  man
must  seek  after  woman,  and  not  a  woman  after  a  man  ;
only  the  reason  which  they  assign  for  it  sounds  strange.  Man,
they  say,  was  formed  from  the  ground — woman  from  man's
rib  ;  hence,  in  trying  to  find  a  wife  man  only  looks  after  what
he  had  lost !  This  formation  of  man  from  soft  clay,  and  of
woman  from  a  hard  bone,  also  illustrated  why  man  was  so
much  more  easily  reconcilable  than  woman.  Similarly,  it  was
observed,  that  God  had  not  formed  woman  out  of  the  head,
lest  she  should  become  proud  ;  nor  out  of  the  eye,  lest  she
should  lust ;  nor  out  of  the  ear,  lest  she  should  be  curious ;
nor  out  of  the  mouth,  lest  she  should  be  talkative  ;  nor  out  of
the  heart,  lest  she  should  be  jealous  ;  nor  out  of  the  hand,
lest  she  should  be  covetous  ;  nor  out  of  the  foot,  lest  she  be
a  busybody ;  but  out  of  the  rib,  which  was  always  covered.
Modesty  was,  therefore,  a  prime  quality.  Jt  was  no  doubt


Mothers,  Daughters,  and  Wives  in  Israel.     147

chiefly  in  jealous  regard  for  this,  that  women  were  interdicted
engaging  in  Rabbinical  studies  ;  and  a  story  is  related  to  show
how  even  the  wisest  of  women,  Beruria,  was  thereby  brought
to  the  brink  of  extreme  danger.  It  is  not  so  easy  to  explain
why  women  were  dispensed  from  all  positive  obligations
(commands,  but  not  prohibitions)  that  were  not  general  in
their  bearing  (Kidd.  i.  7,  8),  but  fixed  to  certain  periods  of
time  (such  as  wearing  the  phylacteries,  etc.),  and  from  that  of
certain  prayers,  unless  it  be  that  woman  was  considered  not
her  own  mistress  but  subject  to  others,  or  else  that  husband
and  wife  were  regarded  as  one,  so  that  his  merits  and  prayers
applied  to  her  as  well.  Indeed,  this  view,  at  least  so  far  as
the  meritorious  nature  of  a  man's  engagement  with  the  law
is  concerned,  is  expressly  brought  forward,  and  women  are
accordingly  admonished  to  encourage  their  husbands  in  all
such  studies.

We  can  understand  how,  before  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,
marriage  should  have  been  looked  upon  as  of  religious
obligation.  Many  passages  of  Scripture  were  at  least  quoted
in  support  of  this  idea.  Ordinarily,  a  young  man  was  expected
to  enter  the  wedded  state  (according  to  Maimonides)  at  the
age  of  sixteen  or  seventeen,  while  the  age  of  twenty  may
be  regarded  as  the  utmost  limit  conceded,  unless  study  so
absorbed  time  and  attention  as  to  leave  no  leisure  for  the
duties  of  married  life.  Still  it  was  thought  better  even  to
neglect  study  than  to  remain  single.  Yet  money  cares  on
account  of  wife  and  children  were  dreaded.  The  same
comparison  is  used  in  reference  to  them,  which  our  Lord
applies  to  quite  a  different  "  offence,"  that  against  the  "  little
ones  "  (Luke  xvii.  2).  Such  cares  are  called  by  the  Rabbis,
"  a  millstone  round  the  neck "  (Kidd.  29  b).  In  fact,  the


148  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

expression  seems  to  have  become  proverbial,  like  so  many
others  which  are  employed  in  the  New  Testament.

We  read  in  the  Gospel  that,  when  the  Virgin-mother  "  was
espoused  to  Joseph,  before  they  came  together,  she  was
found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Then  Joseph  her
husband,  being  a  just  man,  and  not  willing  to  make  her
a  public  example,  was  minded  to  put  her  away  privily "
(Matt.  i.  1 8,  19).  The  narrative  implies  a  distinction  be-
tween betrothal  and  marriage — Joseph  being  at  the  time
betrothed,  but  not  actually  married  to  the  Virgin-mother.
Even  in  the  Old  Testament  a  distinction  is  made  between
betrothal  and  marriage.  The  former  was  marked  by  a  bridal
present  (or  Mokar,  Gen.  xxxiv.  12;  Ex.  xxii.  17  ;  I  Sam.
xviii.  25),  with  which  the  father,  however,  would  in  certain
circumstances  dispense.  From  the  moment  of  her  betrothal
a  woman  was  treated  as  if  she  were  actually  married.  The
union  could  not  be  dissolved,  except  by  regular  divorce ;
breach  of  faithfulness  was  regarded  as  adultery ;  and  the
property  of  the  woman  became  virtually  that  of  her  betrothed,
unless  he  had  expressly  renounced  it  (Kidd.  ix.  i).  But  even
in  that  case  he  was  her  natural  heir.  It  is  impossible  here  to
enter  into  the  various  legal  details,  as,  for  example,  about  pro-
perty or  money  which  might  come  to  a  woman  after  betrothal
or  marriage.  The  law  adjudicated  this  to  the  husband,
yet  with  many  restrictions,  and  with  infinite  delicacy  towards
the  woman,  as  if  reluctant  to  put  in  force  the  rights  of  the
stronger  (Kidd.  viii.  I,  etc.).  From  the  Mishnah  (Bab.  E.  x.  4)
we  also  learn  that  there  were  regular  Shit  re  Entsin,  or
writings  of  betrothal,  drawn  up  by  the  authorities  (the  costs
being  paid  by  the  bridegroom).  These  stipulated  the  mutual
obligations,  the  dowry,  and  all  other  points  on  which  the


Mothers,  Daughters •,  and  Wives  in  Israel.     149

parties  had  agreed.  The  Shitre  Erusin  were  different  from
the  regular  Chethubah  (literally,  'writing),  or  marriage  con-
tract, without  which  the  Rabbis  regarded  a  marriage  as
merely  legalised  concubinage  (Cheth.  v.  i).  The  Chethubah
provided  a  settlement  of  at  least  two  hundred  denars  for
a  maiden,  and  one  hundred  denars  for  a  widow,  while  the
priestly  council  at  Jerusalem  fixed  four  hundred  denars  for  a
priest's  daughter.  Of  course  these  sums  indicate  only  the
legal  minimum,  and  might  be  increased  indefinitely  at  plea-
sure, though  opinions  differ  whether  any  larger  sums  might  be
legally  exacted,  if  matters  did  not  go  beyond  betrothal.  The
form  at  present  in  use  among  the  Jews  sets  forth,  that  the
bridegroom  weds  his  bride  "  according  to  the  law  of  Moses  and
of  Israel ; "  that  he  promises  "  to  please,  to  honour,  to  nourish,
and  to  care  for  her,  as  is  the  manner  of  the  men  of  Israel,"
adding  thereto  the  woman's  consent,  the  document  being
signed  by  two  witnesses.  In  all  probability  this  was  substan-
tially the  form  in  olden  times.  In  Jerusalem  and  in  Galilee —
where  it  was  said  that  men  in  their  choice  had  regard  to  "  a
fair  degree,"  while  in  the  rest  of  Judaea  they  looked  a  good
deal  after  money — widows  had  the  right  of  residence  in  their
husband's  house  secured  to  them.

On  the  other  hand,  a  father  was  bound  to  provide  a  dowry
(nedan,  nedanjah)  for  his  daughter  conformable  to  her  station
in  life ;  and  a  second  daughter  could  claim  a  portion  equal  to
that  of  her  elder  sister,  or  else  one-tenth  of  all  immovable
property.  In  case  of  the  father's  death,  the  sons,  who,  accord-
ing to  Jewish  law,  were  his  sole  heirs,  were  bound  to  maintain
their  sisters,  even  though  this  would  have  thrown  them  upon
public  charity,  and  to  endow  each  with  a  tenth  part  of  what
had  been  left.  The  dowry,  whether  in  money,  property,  or


150  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

jewellery,  was  entered  into  the  marriage  contract,  and  really
belonged  to  the  wife,  the  husband  being  obliged  to  add  to  it
one-half  more,  if  it  consisted  of  money  or  money's  value  ;  and
if  of  jewellery,  etc.,  to  assign  to  her  four-fifths  of  its  value.  In
case  of  separation  (not  divorce)  he  was  bound  to  allow  her  a
proper  aliment,  and  to  re-admit  her  to  his  table  and  house  on
the  Sabbath-eve.  A  wife  was  entitled  to  one-tenth  of  her
dowry  for  pin-money.  If  a  father  gave  away  his  daughter
without  any  distinct  statement  about  her  dowry,  he  was  bound
to  allow  her  at  least  fifty  sus;  and  if  it  had  been  expressly  sti-
pulated that  she  was  to  have  no  dowry  at  all,  it  was  delicately
enjoined  that  the  bridegroom  should,  before  marriage,  give  her
sufficient  for  the  necessary  outfit.  An  orphan  was  to  receive
a  dowry  of  at  least  fifty  sus  from  the  parochial  authorities.
A  husband  could  not  oblige  his  wife  to  leave  the  Holy  Land
nor  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  nor  yet  to  change  a  town  for  a
country  residence,  or  vice  versd,  nor  a  good  for  a  bad  house.
These  are  only  a  few  of  the  provisions  which  show  how  care-
fully the  law  protected  the  interests  of  women.  To  enter  into
farther  details  would  lead  beyond  our  present  object.  All  this
was  substantially  settled  at  the  betrothal,  which,  in  Judsea  at
least,  seems  to  have  been  celebrated  by  a  feast.  Only  a  bond
fide  breach  of  these  arrangements,  or  wilful  fraud,  was  deemed
valid  ground  for  dissolving  the  bond  once  formed.  Other-
wise, as  already  noted,  a  regular  divorce  was  necessary.

According    to    Rabbinical    law   certain    formalities    were
requisite  to  make  a  betrothal  legally  valid.     These  consisted
either   in   handing   to   a   woman,  directly   or  through  mes
sengers,  a  piece  of  money,  however  small,  or  else  a  letter,

1  There  was  also  a  third  mode  of  espousal— simply  by  cohabitation,  but  this
was  very  strongly  disapproved  by  the  Rabbis,


Mother s.  Daughter s,  and  Wives  in  Israel.     151

provided  it  were  in  each  case  expressly  stated  before  witnesses,
that  the  man  thereby  intended  to  espouse  the  woman  as
his  wife.  The  marriage  followed  after  a  longer  or  shorter
interval,  the  limits  of  which,  however,  were  fixed  by  law.
The  ceremony  itself  consisted  in  leading  the  bride  into  the
house  of  the  bridegroom,  with  certain  formalities,  mostly  dating
from  very  ancient  times.  Marriage  with  a  maiden  was
commonly  celebrated  on  a  Wednesday  afternoon,  whicfc
allowed  the  first  days  of  the  week  for  preparation,  and
enabled  the  husband,  if  he  had  a  charge  to  prefer  against
the  previous  chastity  of  his  bride,  to  make  immediate  com-
plaint before  the  local  Sanhedrim,  which  sat  every  Thursday.
On  the  other  hand,  the  marriage  of  a  widow  was  celebrated
on  Thursday  afternoon,  which  left  three  days  of  the  week  for
"  rejoicing  with  her."  This  circumstance  enables  us,  with  some
certainty,  to  arrange  the  date  of  the  events  which  preceded
the  marriage  in  Cana.  Inferring  from  the  accompanying
festivities  that  it  was  the  marriage  of  a  maiden,  and  there-
fore took  place  on  a  Wednesday,  we  have  the  following
succession  of  events : — On  Thursday  (beginning  as  every
Jewish  day  with  the  previous  evening),  testimony  of  the
Baptist  to  the  Sanhedrim-deputation  from  Jerusalem.  On
Friday  (John  i.  29),  "John  seeth  Jesus  coming  unto  him,"
and  significantly  preacheth  the  first  sermon  about  "  the  Lamb
of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  On
Saturday  (ver.  35),  John's  second  sermon  on  the  same  text ;
the  consequent  conversion  of  St.  John  and  St.  Andrew,  and
the  calling  of  St.  Peter.  On  Sunday  (ver.  43),  our  Lord  Him-
self preacheth  His  first  Messianic  sermon,  and  calls  Philip  and
Nathanael.  On  "the  third  day"  after  it,  that  is,  on  Wednes-
day, was  the  marriage  in  Cana  of  Galilee.  The  significance


Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

of  these  dates,  when  compared  with  those  in  the  week  of
our  Lord's  Passion,  will  be  sufficiently  evident.

But  this  is  not  all  that  may  be  learned  from  the  account
of  the  marriage  in  Cana.  Of  course,  there  was  a  "  marriage-
feast,"  as  on  all  these  occasions.  For  this  reason,  mar-
riages were  not  celebrated  either  on  the  Sabbath,  or  on
the  day  before  or  after  it,  lest  the  Sabbath-rest  should  be
endangered.  Nor  was  it  lawful  to  wed  on  any  of  the  three
annual  festivals,  in  order,  as  the  Rabbis  put  it,  "not  to
mingle  one  joy  (that  of  the  marriage)  with  another  (that  of
the  festival)."  As  it  was  deemed  a  religious  duty  to  give
pleasure  to  the  newly-married  couple,  the  merriment  at
times  became  greater  than  the  more  strict  Rabbis  approved.
Accordingly,  it  is  said  of  one,  that  to  produce  gravity  he  broke
a  vase  worth  about  £2$  ;  of  another,  that  at  his  son's
wedding  he  broke  a  costly  glass  ;  and  of  a  third,  that  being
asked  to  sing,  he  exclaimed,  Woe  to  us,  for  we  must  all  die !
For,  as  it  is  added  (Ber.  31  a) :  "It  is  forbidden  to  man,  that
his  mouth  be  filled  with  laughter  in  this  world  (dispensation),
as  it  is  written,  '  Then  our  mouth  was  filled  with  laughter,
and  our  tongue  with  singing.'  When  is  that  to  be  ?  At  the
time  when  'they  shall  sing  among  the  heathen,  The  Lord
hath  done  great  things  for  them.'"

It  deserves  notice,  that  at  the  marriage  in  Cana  there  is  no
mention  of  "  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom,"  or,  as  we  would
call  them,  the  groomsmen.  This  was  in  strict  accordance
with  Jewish  custom,  for  groomsmen  were  customary  in  Judcea,
but  not  in  Galilee  (Cheth.  25  a).  This  also  casts  light  upon  the
locality  where  John  iii.  29  was  spoken,  in  which  "  the  friend
of  the  bridegroom"  is  mentioned.  But  this  expression  is
quite  different  from  that  of  "  children  of  the  bridechamber."


Mothers,  Daughters,  and  Wives  in  Israel.     153

which  occurs  in  Matt.  ix.  15,  where  the  scene  is  once  more
laid  in  Galilee.  The  term  "  children  of  the  bridechamber  "  is
.simply  a  translation  of  the  Rabbinical  " bene  Chuppah"  and
means  the  guests  invited  to  the  bridal.  In  Judaea  there  were
at  every  marriage  two  groomsmen  or  "  friends  of  the  bride-
groom"— one  for  the  bridegroom,  the  other  for  his  bride.
Before  marriage,  they  acted  as  a  kind  of  intermediaries
between  the  couple ;  at  the  wedding  they  offered  gifts,  waited
upon  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  and  attended  them  to  the
bridal  chamber,  being  also,  as  it  were,  the  guarantors  of  the
bride's  virgin  chastity.  Hence,  when  St.  Paul  tells  the
Corinthians  (2  Cor.  xi.  2)  :  "  I  am  jealous  over  you  with  godly
jealousy  ;  for  I  have  espoused  you  to  one  husband,  that  I  may
present  you  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ,"  he  speaks,  as  it
were,  in  the  character  of  groomsman  or  "  bridegroom's  friend,"
who  had  acted  as  such  at  the  spiritual  union  of  Christ  with
the  Corinthian  Church.  And  we  know  that  it  was  specially
the  duty  of  the  "  friend  of  the  bridegroom  "  so  to  present  to
him  his  bride.  Similarly  it  was  his  also,  after  marriage,  to  main-
tain proper  terms  between  the  couple,  and  more  particularly
to  defend  the  good  fame  of  the  bride  against  all  imputations.
It  may  interest  some  to  know  that  this  custom  also  was
traced  up  to  highest  authority.  Thus,  in  the  spiritual  union
of  Israel  with  their  God,  Moses  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  friend
of  the  bridegroom"  who  leads  out  the  bride  (Ex.  xix.  17)  ;
while  Jehovah,  as  the  bridegroom,  meets  His  Church  at  Sinai
(Ps.  Ixviii.  7  ;  PirkediR.EL  41).  Nay,  in  some  mystic  writings
God  is  described  as  acting  "  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom,"
when  our  first  parents  met  in  Eden.  There  is  a  touch  of
poetry  in  the  application  of  Ezek.  xxviii.  13  to  that  scene,
when  angels  led  the  choir,  and  decked  and  watched  the


154  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

bridal-bed  (Ab.  de  R.  Nat/tan  iv.  and  xii.).  According  to
another  ancient  Rabbinical  commentary  (Ber.  R.  viii.),  God
Almighty  Himself  took  the  cup  of  blessing  and  spoke  the
benediction,  while  Michael  and  Gabriel  acted  the  "bride-
groom's friends "  to  our  first  parents  when  they  wedded  in
Paradise.

With  such  a  "  benediction,"  preceded  by  a  brief  formula,
with  which  the  bride  was  handed  over  to  her  husband  (Tobit
vii.  13),  the  wedding  festivities  commenced.1  And  so  the  pair
were  led  towards  the  bridal  chamber  (Cheder)  and  the  bridal  bed
(Chuppafy?1  The  bride  went  with  her  hair  unloosed.  Ordinarily,
it  was  most  strictly  enjoined  upon  women  to  have  their  head
and  hair  carefully  covered.  This  may  throw  some  light  upon
the  difficult  passage,  I  Cor.  xi.  i-io.  We  must  bear  in  mind
that  the  apostle  there  argues  with  Jews,  and  that  on  their  own
ground,  convincing  them  by  a  reference  to  their  own  views,
customs,  and  legends  of  the  propriety  of  the  practice  which  he
enjoins.  From  that  point  of  view  the  propriety  of  a  woman
having  her  head  "  covered  "  could  not  be  called  in  question.
The  opposite  would,  to  a  Jew,  have  indicated  immodesty.
Indeed,  it  was  the  custom  in  the  case  of  a  woman  accused  of
adultery  to  have  her  hair  "  shorn  or  shaven,"  at  the  same  time
using  this  formula :  "  Because  thou  hast  departed  from  the
manner  of  the  daughters  of  Israel,  who  go  with  their  head
covered ;  .  .  .  therefore  that  has  befallen  thee  which  thou
hast  chosen."  This  so  far  explains  verses  5  and  6.  The
expression  "power,"  as  applied  in  verse  10  to  the  head  of

1  It  is,  to  say  the  least,  doubtful  whether  the  Rabbinical  form  of  this  benedic-
tion and  of  that  at  betrothal  dates  from  earliest  times.  However  beautiful,  it
seems  far  too  elaborate  for  that

*  The  distinction  is  marked  in  Joel  ii.  16;  the  Chuppah  is  also  mentioned
in  Ps.  xix.  5.


Mothers,  Daughters,  and  Wives  in  Israel.      155

woman,  seems  to  refer  to  this  covering,  indicating,  as  it  did,
that  she  was  under  the  power  of  her  husband,  while  the
very  difficult  addition,  "  because  of  the  angels,"  may  either
allude  to  the  presence  of  the  angels  and  to  the  well-known
Jewish  view  (based,  no  doubt,  on  truth)  that  those  angels
may  be  grieved  or  offended  by  our  conduct,  and  bear
the  sad  tidings  before  the  throne  of  God,  or  it  may  pos-
sibly refer  to  the  very  ancient  Jewish  belief,  that  the  evil
spirits  gained  power  over  a  woman  who  went  with  her  head
bare.

The  custom  of  a  bridal  veil — either  for  the  bride  alone,  or
spread  over  the  couple — was  of  ancient  date.  It  was  inter-
dicted for  a  time  by  the  Rabbis  after  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem.  Still  more  ancient  was  the  wearing  of  crowns
(Cant.  iii.  n  ;  Isa.  Ixi.  10;  Ezek.  xvi.  12),  which  was  also  pro-
hibited after  the  last  Jewish  war.  Palm  and  myrtle  branches
were  borne  before  the  couple,  grain  or  money  was  thrown
about,  and  music  preceded  the  procession,  in  which  all  who  met
it  were,  as  a  religious  duty,  expected  to  join.1  The  Parable  of
the  Ten  Virgins,  who,  with  their  lamps,  were  in  expectancy  of
the  bridegroom  (Matt.  xxv.  i),  is  founded  on  Jewish  custom.
For,  according  to  Rabbinical  authority,  such  lamps  carried  on
the  top  of  staves  were  frequently  used,  while  ten  .is  the  number
always  mentioned  in  connection  with  public  solemnities.2  The
marriage  festivities  generally  lasted  a  week,  but  the  bridal
days  extended  over  a  full  month.3

1  See  my  article  on  "  Marriage  "  in  Cassell's  Bible  Educator,  vol.  iv.  pp.  267-270.

2  According  to  R.  Simon  (on  CheL  ii.  8)  it  was  an  Eastern  custom  that,  when  the
bride  was  led  to  her  future  home,  "they  carried  before  the  party  about  ten"  such
lamps.

3  The  practice  of  calling  a  wife  a  bride  during  the  first  year  o£-liur  marriage  is
probably  based  on  Deut.  xxiv.  5.

0?  THB


156  Sketches  of  Jeivisk  Life.

Having  entered  thus  fully  on  the  subject  of  marriage,  a
few  further  particulars  may  be  of  interest.  The  bars  to
marriage  mentioned  in  the  Bible  are  sufficiently  known.  To
these  the  Rabbis  added  others,  which  have  been  arranged
under  two  heads — as  farther  extending  the  laws  of  kindred
(to  their  secondary degrees),  and  as  intended  to  guard  morality.
The  former  were  extended  over  the  whole  line  of  forbidden
kindred,  where  that  line  was  direct,  and  to  one  link  farther
where  the  line  became  indirect — as,  for  example,  to  the  wife
of  a  maternal  uncle,  or  to  the  step-mother  of  a  wife.  In  the
category  of  guards  to  morality  we  include  such  prohibitions
as  that  a  divorced  woman  might  not  marry  her  seducer,  nor  a
man  the  woman  to  whom  he  had  brought  her  letter  of  divorce,
or  in  whose  case  he  had  borne  testimony  ;  or  of  marriage  with
those  not  in  their  right  senses,  or  in  a  state  of  drunkenness ;
or  of  the  marriage  of  minors,  or  under  fraud,  etc.  A  widower
had  to  wait  over  three  festivals,  a  widow  three  months,  before
re-marrying,  or  if  she  was  with  child  or  gave  suck,  for  two
years.  A  woman  might  not  be  married  a  third  time  ;  no
marriage  could  take  place  within  thirty  days  of  the  death  of  a
near  relative,  nor  yet  on  the  Sabbath,  nor  on  a  feast-day,  etc.
Of  the  marriage  to  a  deceased  husband's  brother  (or  the  next
of  kin),  in  case  of  childlessness,  it  is  unnecessary  here  to  speak,
since  although  the  Mishnah  devotes  a  whole  tractate  to  it
(Yebamoth),  and  it  was  evidently  customary  at  the  time  of
Christ  (Mark  xii.  19,  etc.),  the  practice  was  considered  as
connected  with  the  territorial  possession  of  Palestine,  and
ceased  with  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth
(Bechar.  i.  7).  A  priest  was  to  inquire  into  the  legal  descent
of  his  wife  (up  to  four  degrees  if  the  daughter  of  a  priest,
otherwise  up  to  five  degrees),  except  where  the  bride's  father


Mothers,  Daughters,  and  Wives  in  Israel.      157

was  a  priest  in  actual  service,  or  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim.
The  high-priest's  bride  was  to  be  a  maid  not  older  than  six
months  beyond  her  puberty.

The  fatal  ease  with  which  divorce  could  be  obtained,  and
its  frequency,  appear  from  the  question  addressed  to  Christ
by  the  Pharisees  :  "  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  his
wife  for  every  cause  ? " J  (Matt.  xix.  3),  and  still  more  from  the
astonishment  with  which  the  disciples  had  listened  to  the
reply  of  the  Saviour  (ver.  10).  That  answer  was  much  wider
in  its  range  than  our  Lord's  initial  teaching  in  the  Ser-
mon on  the  Mount  (Matt.  v.  32).2  To  the  latter  no  Jew  could
have  had  any  objection,  even  though  its  morality  would  have
seemed  elevated  beyond  their  highest  standard,  represented
in  this  case  by  the  school  of  Shammai,  while  that  of  Hillel,
and  still  more  Rabbi  Akiba,  presented  the  lowest  opposite
extreme.  But  in  reply  to  the  Pharisees,  our  Lord  placed  the
whole  question  on  grounds  which  even  the  strictest  Sham-
maite  would  have  refused  to  adopt.  For  the  farthest  limit
to  which  he  would  have  gone  would  have  been  to  restrict  the
cause  of  divorce  to  "  a  matter  of  uncleanness  "  (Deut.  xxiv.  i),
by  which  he  would  probably  have  understood  not  only  a
breach  of  the  marriage  vow,  but  of  the  laws  and  customs  of
the  land.  In  fact,  we  know  that  it  included  every  kind  of
impropriety,  such  as  going  about  with  loose  hair,  spinning  in
the  street,  familiarly  talking  with  men,  ill-treating  her  husband's
parents  in  his  presence,  brawling,  that  is,  "  speaking  to  her

1  This  other  reading  has  been  proposed  :  "for  every  offence."     This  would  cer-
tainly tally  better  with  the  spirit  of  the  Pharisees  than  the  reading  in  our  text  us
receptus.

2  Rabbinical  ordinances  so  limited  the  Mosaic  law  in  regard  to  an  adulteress,
that  the  trial  and  punishment  could  only  have  been  of  the  very  rarest  occurrence.
Into  these  laws  and  distinctions  we  cannot,  however,  at  present  enter.


158  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

husband  so  loudly  that  the  neighbours  could  hear  her  in  the
adjoining  house  "  (Chethub.  vii.  6),  a  general  bad  reputation,  or
the  discovery  of  fraud  before  marriage.  On  the  other  hand,
the  wife  could  insist  on  being  divorced  if  her  husband  were  a
leper,  or  affected  with  polypus,  or  engaged  in  a  disagreeable
or  dirty  trade,  such  as  that  of  a  tanner  or  coppersmith.  One
of  the  cases  in  which  divorce  was  obligatory  was,  if  either
party  had  become  heretical,  or  ceased  to  profess  Judaism.
But  even  so,  there  were  at  least  checks  to  the  danger  of
general  lawlessness,  such  as  the  obligation  of  paying  to  a  wife
her  portion,  and  a  number  of  minute  ordinances  about  formal
letters  of  divorce,  without  which  no  divorce  was  legal,1  and
which  had  to  be  couched  in  explicit  terms,  handed  to  the
woman  herself,  and  that  in  presence  of  two  witnesses,  etc.

According  to  Jewish  law  there  were  four  obligations  incum-
bent on  a  wife  towards  her  husband,  and  ten  by  which  he  was
bound.  Of  the  latter,  three  are  referred  to  in  Ex.  xxi.  9,  10  ;
the  other  seven  include  her  settlement,  medical  treatment  in
case  of  sickness,  redemption  from  captivity,  a  respectable
funeral,  provision  in  his  house  so  long  as  she  remained  a
widow  and  had  not  been  paid  her  dowry,  the  support  of  her
daughters  till  they  were  married,  and  a  provision  that  her
sons  should,  besides  receiving  their  portion  of  the  father's
inheritance,  also  share  in  what  had  been  settled  upon  her.
The  obligations  upon  the  wife  were,  that  all  her  gains  should
belong  to  her  husband,  as  also  what  came  to  her  .  after
marriage  by  inheritance  ;  that  the  husband  should  have  the
usufruct  of  her  dowry,  and  of  any  gains  by  it,  provided  he  had
the  administration  of  it,  in  which  case,  however,  he  was  also

1  The  Jews  have  it  that  a  woman  "  is  loosed  from  the  law  of  her  husband  "  by
only  one  of  two  things  :  death  or  a  letter  of  divorce  ;  hence  Rom.  vii.  2,  3.


Mothers,  Daughters,  and  Wives  in  Israel.       159

responsible  for  any  loss ;  and  that  he  should  be  considered
her  heir-at-law.1

What  the  family  life  among  the  godly  in  Israel  must  have
been,  how  elevated  its  tone,  how  loving  its  converse,  or  how
earnestly  devoted  its  mothers  and  daughters,  appears  suffi-
ciently from  the  gospel  story,  from  that  in  the  book  of  Acts,
and  from  notices  in  the  apostolic  letters.  Women,  such  as
the  Virgin-mother,  or  Elisabeth,  or  Anna,  or  those  who
enjoyed  the  privilege  of  ministering  to  the  Lord,  or  who,  after
His  death,  tended  and  watched  for  His  sacred  body,  could
not  have  been  quite  solitary  in  Palestine  ;  we  find  their  sisters
in  a  Dorcas,  a  Lydia,  a  Phoebe,  and  those  women  of  whom
St.  Paul  speaks  in  Phil.  iv.  3,  and  whose  lives  he  sketches  in
his  Epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus.  Wives  such  as  Priscilla,
mothers  such  as  that  of  Zebedee's  children,  or  of  Mark,  or
like  St.  John's  "  elect  lady,"  or  as  Lois  and  Eunice,  must  have
kept  the  moral  atmosphere  pure  and  sweet,  and  shed  precious
light  on  their  homes  and  on  society,  corrupt  to  the  core  as  it
was  under  the  sway  of  heathenism.  What  and  how  they
taught  their  households,  and  that  even  under  the  most  dis-
advantageous outward  circumstances,  we  learn  from  the
history  of  Timothy.  And  although  they  were  undoubtedly
in  that  respect  without  many  of  the  opportunities  which  we
enjoy,  there  was  one  sweet  practice  of  family  religion,  going
beyond  the  prescribed  prayers,  which  enabled  them  to  teach
their  children  from  tenderest  years  to  intertwine  the  Word  of
God  with  their  daily  devotion  and  daily  life.  For  it  was  the
custom  to  teach  a  child  some  verse  of  Holy  Scripture  begin-
ning or  ending  with  precisely  the  same  letters  as  its  Hebrew

1  This  is  not  the  place  to  enter  into  the  legal  details,  fully  discussed  by  the
Rabbis,


/6o  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

name,  and  this  birthday  text  or  guardian-promise  the  child
was  day  by  day  to  insert  in  its  prayers.1  Such  guardian
words,  familiar  to  the  mind  from  earliest  years,  endeared  to
the  heart  by  tenderest  recollections,  would  remain  with  the
youth  in  life's  temptations,  and  come  back  amid  the  din  of
manhood's  battle.  Assuredly,  of  Jewish  children  so  reared,
so  trained,  so  taught,  it  might  be  rightly  said  :  "  Take  heed
that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones ;  for  I  say  unto
you,  That  in  heaven  their  angels  do  always  behold  the  face
of  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven."

1  Kol Kore^  by  R.  El.  Soloweycyk,  p.  184.     Compare  Taan.  9,  a.


CHAPTER  X.

IN  DEATH  AND  AFTER  DEATH.

A  SADDER  picture  could  scarcely  be  drawn  than  that
of  the  dying  Rabbi  Jochanan  ben  Saccai,  that  "  light
of  Israel "  immediately  before  and  after  the  destruction  of
the  Temple,  and  for  two  years  the  president  of  the  Sanhedrim.
We  read  in  the  Talmud  (Ber.  28  b)  that,  when  his  disciples
came  to  see  him  on  his  death-bed,  he  burst  into  tears.  To
their  astonished  inquiry  why  he,  "the  light  of  Israel,  the  right
pillar  of  the  Temple,  and  its  mighty  hammer,"  betrayed
such  signs  of  fear,  he  replied  :  "  If  I  were  now  to  be  brought
before  an  earthly  king,  who  lives  to-day  and  dies  to-morrow,
whose  wrath  and  whose  bonds  are  not  everlasting,  and  whose
sentence  of  death,  even,  is  not  that  to  everlasting  death,  who
can  be  assuaged  by  arguments,  or  perhaps  bought  off  by
money — I  should  tremble  and  weep  ;  how  much  more  reason
have  I  for  it,  when  about  to  be  led  before  the  King  of  kings,
the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He,  Who  liveth  and  abideth  for
ever.  Whose  chains  are  chains  for  evermore,  and  Whose
sentence  of  death  killeth  for  ever,  Whom  I  cannot  assuage
with  words,  nor  bribe  by  money  !  And  not  only  so,  but  there
are  before  me  two  ways,  one  to  paradise  and  the  other  to  hei((

M


1 62  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

and  I  know  not  which  of  the  two  ways  I  shall  have  to  go—
whether  to  paradise  or  to  hell :  how,  then,  shall  I  not  shea
tears  ? "  Side  by  side  with  this  we  may  place  the  opposite
saying  of  R.  Jehudah,  called  the  Holy,  who,  when  he  died,
lifted  up  both  his  hands  to  heaven,  protesting  that  none  of
those  ten  fingers  had  broken  the  law  of  God !  It  were
difficult  to  say  which  of  these  two  is  more  contrary  to  the
light  and  liberty  of  the  Gospel — the  utter  hopelessness  of  the
one,  or  the  apparent  presumption  of  the  other.

And  yet  these  sayings  also  recall  to  us  something  in  the
Gospel.  For  there  also  we  read  of  two  ways — the  one  to
paradise,  the  other  to  destruction,  and  of  fearing  not  those
who  can  kill  the  body,  but  rather  Him  who,  after  He  hath
killed  the  body,  hath  power  to  cast  into  hell.  Nor,  on  the
other  hand,  was  the  assurance  of  St.  Stephen,  of  St.  James,
or  of  St.  Paul,  less  confident  than  that  of  Jehudah,  called  the
Holy,  though  it  expressed  itself  in  a  far  different  manner  and
rested  on  quite  other  grounds.  Never  are  the  voices  of  the
Rabbis  more  discordant,  and  their  utterances  more  contra-
dictory or  unsatisfying  than  in  view  of  the  great  problems  of
humanity  :  sin,  sickness,  death,  and  the  hereafter.  Most  truly
did  St.  Paul,  taught  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel  in  all  the  tradi-
tions and  wisdom  of  the  fathers,  speak  the  inmost  conviction
of  every  Christian  Rabbinist,  that  it  is  only  our  Saviour
Jesus  Christ  Who  "  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light
through  the  Gospel"  (2  Tim.  i.  10).

When  the  disciples  asked  our  Lord,  in  regard  to  the  "  man
which  was  blind  from  his  birth  : "  "  Master,  who  did  sin,  this
man,  or  his  parents,  that  he  was  born  blind  ? "  (John  ix.  I,  2)
we  vividly  realise  that  we  hear  a  strictly  Jewish  question.  It
was  just  such  as  was  likely  to  be  raised,  and  it  exactly


In  Death  and  after  Death.  163

expressed  Jewish  belief.  That  children  benefited  or  suffered
according  to  the  spiritual  state  of  their  parents  was  a  doctrine
current  among  the  Jews.  But  they  also  held  that  an  un-
born child  might  contract  guilt,  since  the  Yezer  ha-ra,  or  evil
disposition  which  was  present  from  its  earliest  formation,
might  even  then  be  called  into  activity  by  outward  circum-
stances. And  sickness  was  regarded  as  alike  the  punishment
for  sin  and  its  atonement.  But  we  also  meet  with  statements
which  remind  us  of  the  teaching  of  Heb.  xii.  5,  9.  In  fact,
the  apostolic  quotation  from  Prov.  iii.  is  made  for  exactly  the
same  purpose  in  the  Talmud  (Ber.  5  a),  in  how  different  a
spirit  will  appear  from  the  following  summary.  It  appears
that  two  of  the  Rabbis  had  disagreed  as  to  what  were  "  the
chastisements  of  love,"  the  one  maintaining,  on  the  ground  of
Ps.  xciv.  12,  that  they  were  such  as  did  not  prevent  a  man
from  study,  the  other  inferring  from  Ps.  Ixvi.  20  that  the}
were  such  as  did  not  hinder  prayer.  Superior  authority
decided  that  both  kinds  were  "  chastisements  of  love,"  at  the
same  time  answering  the  quotation  from  Ps.  xciv.  by  pro-
posing to  read,  not  " teachest  him"  but  " teachest  us  out  of
Thy  law."  But  that  the  law  teaches  us  that  chastisements  are
of  great  advantage  might  be  inferred  as  follows  :  If,  according
to  Ex.  xxi.  26,  27,  a  slave  obtained  freedom  through  the
chastisement  of  his  master — a  chastisement  which  affected
only  one  of  his  members — how  much  more  must  those  chas-
tisements effect  which  purified  the  whole  body  of  man  ?  More-
over, as  another  Rabbi  reminds  us,  the  "  covenant "  is  men-
tioned in  connection  with  salt  (Lev.ii.  13),  and  also  in  connection
with  chastisements  (Deut.  xxviii.  58).  "As  is  the  covenant,"
spoken  of  in  connection  with  salt,  which  gives  taste  to  the
meat,  so  also  is  "  the  covenant  "  spoken  of  in  connection  with


164  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

chastisements,  which  purge  away  all  the  sins  of  a  man.
Indeed,  as  a  third  Rabbi  says :  "  Three  good  gifts  hath  the
Holy  One — blessed  be  He! — given  to  Israel,  and  each  of  them
only  through  sufferings — the  law,  the  land  of  Israel,  and  the
world  to  come."  The  law,  according  to  Ps.  xciv.  12  ;  the
land,  according  to  Deut.  viii.  5,  which  is  immediately  followed
by  ver.  7  ;  and  the  world  to  come,  according  to  Prov.  vi.  23.

As  on  most  other  subjects,  the  Rabbis  were  accurate  and
keen  observers  of  the  laws  of  health,  and  their  regulations
are  often  far  in  advance  of  modern  practice.  From  many
allusions  in  the  Old  Testament  we  infer  that  the  science  of
medicine,  which  was  carried  to  comparatively  great  perfection
in  Egypt,  where  every  disease  had  its  own  physician,  was  also
cultivated  in  Israel.  Thus  the  sin  of  Asa,  in  trusting  too
much  to  earthly  physicians,  is  specially  reproved  (2  Chron.
xvi.  12).  In  New  Testament  times  we  read  of  the  woman
who  had  spent  all  her  substance,  and  suffered  so  much  at  the
hands  of  physicians  (Mark  v.  26)  ;  while  the  use  of  certain
remedies,  such  as  oil  and  wine,  in  the  treatment  of  wounds
(Luke  x.  34),  seems  to  have  been  popularly  known.  St.  Luke
was  a  "  physician "  (Col.  iv.  14)  ;  and  among  the  regular
Temple  officials  there  was  a  medical  man,  whose  duty  it  was  to
attend  to  the  priesthood  who,  from  ministering  barefoot,  must
have  been  specially  liable  to  certain  diseases.  The  Rabbis
ordained  that  every  town  must  have  at  least  one  physician,  who
was  also  to  be  qualified  to  practise  surgery,  or  else  a  physician
and  a  surgeon.  Some  of  the  Rabbis  themselves  engaged  in
medical  pursuits :  and,  in  theory  at  least,  every  practitioner
ought  to  have  had  their  licence.  To  employ  a  heretic  or  a
Hebrew  Christian  was  specially  prohibited,  though  a  heathen
anight,  if  needful,  be  called  in.  But,  despite  their  patronage


In  Death  and  after  Death.  165

of  the  science,  caustic  sayings  also  occur.  "  Physician,  heal
thyself,"  is  really  a  Jewish  proverb  ;  "  Live  not  in  a  city  whose
chief  is  a  medical  man " — he  will  attend  to  public  business
and  neglect  his  patients  ;  "  The  best  among  doctors  deserves
Gehenna  " — for  his  bad  treatment  of  some,  and  for  his  neglect
of  others.  It  were  invidious  to  enter  into  a  discussion  of  the
remedies  prescribed  in  those  times,  although,  to  judge  from
what  is  advised  in  such  cases,  we  can  scarcely  wonder  that
the  poor  woman  in  the  gospel  was  nowise  benefited,  but
rather  the  worse  of  them  (Mark  v.  26).  The  means  recom-
mended were  either  generally  hygienic — and  in  this  respect
the  Hebrews  contrast  favourably  even  with  ourselves — or
purely  medicinal,  or  else  sympathetic,  or  even  magical.  The
prescriptions  consisted  of  simples  or  of  compounds,  vegetables
being  far  more  used  than  minerals.  Cold-water  compresses,
the  external  and  internal  use  of  oil  and  of  wine,  baths  (medi-
cated and  other),  and  a  certain  diet,  were  carefully  indicated
in  special  diseases.  Goats'-milk  and  barley-porridge  were
recommended  in  all  diseases  attended  by  wasting.  Jewish
surgeons  seem  even  to  have  known  how  to  operate  for
cataract.

Ordinarily,  life  was  expected  to  be  protracted,  and  death
regarded  as  alike  the  punishment  and  the  expiation  of  sin.
To  die  within  fifty  years  of  age  was  to  be  cut  off;  within
fifty-two,  to  die  the  death  of  Samuel  the  prophet ;  at  sixty
years  of  age,  it  was  regarded  as  death  at  the  hands  of
Heaven  ;  at  seventy,  as  that  of  an  old  man  ;  and  at  eighty
as  that  of  strength.  Premature  death  was  likened  to  the
falling  off  of  unripe  fruit,  or  the  extinction  of  a  candle.  To
depart  without  having  a  son  was  to  die,  otherwise  it  was  to
fall  asleep.  The  latter  was  stated  to  have  been  the  case


1 66  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

with  David  ;  the  former  with  Joab.  If  a  person  had  finished
his  work,  his  was  regarded  as  the  death  of  the  righteous,
who  is  gathered  to  his  fathers.  Tradition  (Bcr.  8  a)
inferred,  by  a  peculiar  Rabbinical  mode  of  exegesis,  from  a
word  in  Ps.  Ixii.  12,  that  there  were  903  different  kinds  of
dying.  The  worst  of  these  was  angina,  which  was  compared
to  tearing  out  a  thread  from  a  piece  of  wool ;  while  the  sweet-
est and  gentlest,  which  was  compared  to  drawing  a  hair  out
of  milk,  was  called  "  death  by  a  kiss."  The  latter  designation
originated  from  Numb,  xxxiii.  38  and  Deut.  xxxiv.  5,  in  which
Aaron  and  Moses  are  respectively  said  to  have  died  "  accord-
ing to  the  word" — literally,  "by  the  mouth  of  Jehovah."
Over  six  persons,  it  was  said,  the  angel  of  death1  had  had
no  power — viz.,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  because  they  had
seen  their  work  quite  completed ;  and  over  Miriam,  Aaron,
and  Moses,  who  had  died  by  "  the  kiss  of  God."  If  prema-
ture death  was  the  punishment  of  sin,  the  righteous  died
because  others  were  to  enter  on  their  work — Joshua  on  that
of  Moses,  Solomon  on  that  of  David,  etc.  But,  when  the
time  for  death  came,  anything  might  serve  for  its  infliction,
or,  to  put  it  in  Rabbinical  language,  "  O  Lord,  all  these  are
Thy  servants  ; "  for  "  whither  a  man  was  to  go,  thither  his
feet  would  carry  him."

Certain  signs  were  also  noted  as  to  the  time  and  manner  of
dying.  Sudden  death  was  called  "being  swallowed  up,"
death  after  one  day's  illness,  that  of  rejection  ;  after  two
days',  that  of  despair ;  after  four  days',  that  of  reproof ;
after  five  days',  a  natural  death.  Similarly,  the  posture

1  We  purposely  do  not  enter  on  the  Rabbinical  views  about  the  "angel  of
death."  The  Babylon  Talmud,  however,  has  a  curious  passage  about  anointing
the  eyes  of  the  dying  with  oil.


In  Death  and  after  Death.  167

of  the  dying  was  carefully  marked.  To  die  with  a  happy
smile,  or  at  least  with  a  bright  countenance,  or  looking
upward,  was  a  good  omen ;  to  look  downward,  to  seem
disturbed,  to  weep,  or  even  to  turn  to  the  wall,  were  evil
signs.1  On  recovering  from  illness,  it  was  enjoined  to  return
special  thanks.  It  was  a  curious  superstition  (Ber.  55  #),
that,  if  any  one  announced  his  illness  on  the  first  day  of  its
occurrence,  it  might  tend  to  make  him  worse,  and  that  only  on
the  second  day  should  prayers  be  offered  for  him.  Lastly,  we
may  mention  in  this  connection,  as  possibly  throwing  light  on
the  practice  referred  to  by  St.  James  (Jas.  v.  14),  that  it  was
the  custom  to  anoint  the  sick  with  a  mixture  of  oil,  wine,
and  water,  the  preparation  of  which  was  even  allowed  on  the
Sabbath  (Jer.  Ber.  ii.  2).

When  our  Lord  mentioned  visitation  of  the  sick  among  the
evidences  of  that  religion  which  would  stand  the  test  of  the
judgment  day  (Matt.  xxv.  36),  He  appealed  to  a  principle
universally  acknowledged  among  the  Jews.  The  great  Jewish
doctor  Maimonides  holds  that  this  duty  takes  precedence  01
all  other  good  works,  and  the  Talmud  goes  even  so  far  as  to
assert,  that  whoever  visits  the  sick  shall  deliver  his  soul  from
Gehenna  (Ned.  40  a).  Accordingly,  a  Rabbi,  discussing  the
meaning  of  the  expression,  "  Ye  shall  walk  after  the  Lord  your
God  "  (Deut.  xiii.  4),  arrives  at  the  conclusion,  that  it  refers  to
the  imitation  of  what  we  read  in  Scripture  of  His  doings.  Thus
God  clothed  the  naked  (Gen.  iii.  21),  and  so  should  we  ;  He
visited  the  sick  (Gen.  xviii.  i) ;  He  comforted  the  mourners,
(Gen.  xxv.  n);  and  He  buried  the  dead  (Deut.  xxxv.  6);
leaving  us  in  all  this  an  ensample  that  we  should  follow  in  His

1  An  account  of  the  manner  of  "  setting  one's  house  in  order  "  (2  Sam.  xvii,
23  ;  2  Kings  xx.  i),  would  lead  beyond  our  present  purpose.


1 68  Sketches  of  Jeivish  Life.

footsteps  (Sota  14  a).  It  was  possibly  to  encourage  to  this  duty,
or  else  in  reference  to  the  good  effects  of  sympathy  upon  the
sick,  that  we  are  told,  that  whoever  visits  the  sick  takes  away  a
sixtieth  part  of  his  sufferings  (Ned.  39  b).  Nor  was  the  service
of  love  to  stop  here ;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  the  burial  of  the
dead  was  quite  as  urgent  a  duty  as  the  visitation  of  the  sick.
As  the  funeral  procession  passed,  every  one  was  expected,  if
possible,  to  join  the  convoy.  The  Rabbis  applied  to  the
observance  of  this  direction  Prov.  xiv.  32,  and  xix.  17  ;  and  to
its  neglect  Prov.  xvii.  5  (Ber.  18  a).  Similarly,  all  reverence
was  shown  towards  the  remains  of  the  dead,  and  burying-
places  were  kept  free  from  every  kind  of  profanation,  and
even  from  light  conversation.

Burial  followed  generally  as  soon  as  possible  after  death
(Matt.  ix.  23  ;  Acts  v.  6,  10  ;  viii.  2),  no  doubt  partly  on
sanitary  grounds.  For  special  reasons,  however  (Acts  ix.
37>  39)>  or  m  the  case  °f  parents,  there  might  be  a  delay
even  of  days.  The  preparations  for  the  burial  of  our  Lord,
mentioned  in  the  gospels — the  ointment  against  His  burial
(Matt.  xxvi.  12),  the  spices  and  ointments  (Luke  xxiii.  56),
the  mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes — find  their  literal  confirmation
in  what  the  Rabbis  tell  us  of  the  customs  of  the  period
(Ber.  53  a).  At  one  t'me  the  wasteful  expenditure  connected
with  funerals  was  so  great  as  to  involve  in  serious  difficulties
the  poor,  who  would  not  be  outdone  by  their  neighbours.
The  folly  extended  not  only  to  the  funeral  rites,  the  burning
of  spices  at  the  grave,  and  the  depositing  of  money  and
valuables  in  the  tomb,  but  even  to  luxury  in  the  wrappings  of
the  dead  body.  At  last  a  much-needed  reform  was  introduced
by  Rabbi  Gamaliel,  who  left  directions  that  he  was  to  be
buried  in  simple  linen  garments.  In  recognition  of  this  a  cup


In  Death  and  after  Death.  169

is  to  this  day  emptied  to  his  memory  at  funeral  meals.  His
grandson  limited  even  the  number  of  grave-clothes  to  one
dress.  The  burial-dress  is  made  of  the  most  inexpensive  linen,
and  bears  the  name  of  ( Tachrichin}  "  wrappings,"  or  else  the
"  travelling-dress."  At  present  it  is  always  white,  but  formerly
any  other  colour  might  be  chosen,  of  which  we  have  some
curious  instances.  Thus  one  Rabbi  would  not  be  buried  in
white,  lest  he  might  seem  like  one  glad,  nor  yet  in  black,  so
as  not  to  appear  to  sorrow,  but  in  red  ;  while  another  ordered
a  white  dress,  to  show  that  he  was  not  ashamed  of  his  works;
and  yet  a  third  directed  that  he  should  have  his  shoes  and
stockings,  and  a  stick,  to  be  ready  for  the  resurrection !  As
we  know  from  the  gospel,  the  body  was  wrapped  in  "  linen
clothes,"  and  the  face  bound  about  with  a  napkin  (John  xi.  44;
xx.  5,  7).

The  body  having  been  properly  prepared,  the  funeral  rites
proceeded,  as  described  in  the  gospels.  From  the  account  of
the  funeral  procession  at  Nain,  which  the  Lord  of  life  arrested
(Luke  vii.  11-15),  many  interesting  details  may  be  learned.
First)  burying-places  were  always  outside  cities  (Matt.  viii.  28 ;
xxvii.  7,  52,  53;  John  xi.  30,  31).  Neither  watercourses  nor
public  roads  were  allowed  to  pass  through  them,  nor  sheep  to
graze  there.  We  read  of  public  and  private  burying-places —
the  latter  chiefly  in  gardens  and  caves.  It  was  the  practice
to  visit  the  graves  (John  xi.  31)  partly  to  mourn  and  partly
to  pray.  It  was  unlawful  to  eat  or  drink,  to  read,  or  even
to  walk  irreverently  among  them.  Cremation  was  denounced
as  a  purely  heathen  practice,  contrary  to  the  whole  spirit  of
Old  Testament  teaching.  Secondly,  we  know  that,  as  at  Nain,
the  body  was  generally  carried  open  on  a  bier,  or  else  in
an  open  coffin,  the  bearers  frequently  changing  to  give  an


170  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

opportunity  to  many  to  take  part  in  a  work  deemed  so
meritorious.  Graves  in  fields  or  in  the  open  were  often
marked  by  memorial  columns.  Children  less  than  a  month
old  were  carried  to  the  burying  by  their  mothers  ;  those  under
twelve  months  were  borno  on  a  bed  or  stretcher.  Lastly,
the  order  in  which  the  procession  seems  to  have  wound  out  of
Nain  exactly  accords  with  what  we  know  of  the  customs  of
the  time  and  place.  It  was  outside  the  city  gate  that  the
Lord  with  His  disciples  met  the  sad  array.  Had  it  been  in
Judaea  the  hired  mourners  and  musicians  would  have  preceded
the  bier ;  in  Galilee  they  followed.  First  came  the  women,
for,  as  an  ancient  Jewish  commentary  explains — woman,  who
brought  death  into  our  world,  ought  to  lead  the  way  in  the
funeral  procession.  Among  them  our  Lord  readily  recognised
the  widowed  mother,  whose  only  treasure  was  to  be  hidden
from  her  for  ever.  Behind  the  bier  followed,  obedient  to
Jewish  law  and  custom,  "  much  people  of  the  city."  The
sight  of  her  sorrow  touched  the  compassion  of  the  Son  of
Man  ;  the  presence  of  death  called  forth  the  power  of  the  Son
of  God.  To  her  only  He  spoke,  what  in  the  form  of  a
question  He  said  to  the  woman  who  mourned  at  His  own
grave,  ignorant  that  death  had  been  swallowed  up  in  victory,
and  what  He  still  speaks  to  us  from  heaven,  "Weep  not!"
He  bade  not  the  procession  halt,  but,  as  He  touched  the  bier,
they  that  bore  on  it  the  dead  body  stood  still.  It  was  a
marvellous  sight  outside  the  gate  of  Nain.  The  Rabbi  and
His  disciples  should  reverently  have  joined  the  procession ;
they  arrested  it.  One  word  of  power  burst  inwards  the  sluices
of  Hades,  and  out  flowed  once  again  the  tide  of  life.  "  He
that  was  dead  sat  up  on  his  bier,  and  began  to  speak  " — what
words  of  wonderment  we  are  not  told.  It  must  have  been


In  Death  and  after  Death.  171

like  the  sudden  wakening,  which  leaves  not  on  the  conscious-
ness the  faintest  trace  of  the  dream.  Not  of  that  world  but
of  this  would  his  speech  be,  though  he  knew  he  had  been
over  there,  and  its  dazzling  light  made  earth's  sunshine  so  dim,
that  ever  afterwards  life  must  have  seemed  to  him  like  the
sitting  up  on  his  bier,  and  its  faces  and  voices  like  those  of
the  crowd  which  followed  him  to  his  burying.

At  the  grave,  on  the  road  to  which  the  procession  repeatedly
halted,  when  short  addresses  were  occasionally  delivered,  there
was  a  funeral  oration.  If  the  grave  were  in  a  public  cemetery,
at  least  a  foot  and  a  half  must  intervene  between  each  sleeper.
The  caves,  or  rock-hewn  sepulchres,  consisted  of  an  ante-
chamber in  which  the  bier  was  deposited,  and  an  inner  or
rather  lower  cave  in  which  the  bodies  were  deposited,  in  a
recumbent  position,  in  niches.  According  to  the  Talmud
these  abodes  of  the  dead  were  usually  six  feet  long,  nine  feet
wide,  and  ten  feet  high.  Here  there  were  niches  for  eight
bodies  :  three  on  each  side  of  the  entrance,  and  two  opposite.
Larger  sepulchres  held  thirteen  bodies.  The  entrance  to  the
sepulchres  was  guarded  by  a  large  stone  or  by  a  door  (Matt,
xxvii.  66 ;  Mark  xv.  46 ;  John  xi.  38,  39).  This  structure  of
the  tombs  will  explain  some  of  the  particulars  connected  with
the  burial  of  our  Lord,  how  the  women  coming  early  to  the
grave  had  been  astonished  in  finding  the  "  very  great  stone  "
"  rolled  away  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre,"  and  then,  when
they  entered  the  outer  cave,  were  affrighted  to  see  what
seemed  "  a  young  man  sitting  on  the  right  side,  clothed  in  a
long  white  garment "  (Mark  xvi.  4,  5).  Similarly,  it  explains
the  events  as  they  are  successively  recorded  in  John  xx.  1-12,
how  Mary  Magdalene,  "  when  it  was  yet  dark,"  had  come  to
the  sepulchre,  in  every  sense  waiting  for  the  light,  but  even


172  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

groping  had  felt  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away,  and  fled  to
tell  the  disciples  they  had,  as  she  thought,  taken  away  the
Lord  out  of  the  sepulchre.  If  she  knew  of  the  sealing  of  that
stone  and  of  the  Roman  guard,  she  must  have  felt  as  if  the
hatred  of  man  would  now  deprive  their  love  even  of  the  sacred
body  of  their  Lord.  And  yet,  through  it  all,  the  hearts  of  the
disciples  must  have  treasured  hopes,  which  they  scarce  dared
confess  to  themselves.  For  those  other  two  disciples,  witnesses
of  all  His  deeds,  on  earth,  companions  of  His  shame  in
Caiaphas'  palace,  were  also  waiting  for  the  daybreak — only
at  home,  not  like  her  at  the  grave.  And  now  "  they  both  ran
together."  But  on  that  morning,  so  near  the  night  of  betrayal,
"the  other  disciple  did  outrun  Peter."  Grey  light  of  early
spring  had  broken  the  heavy  curtain  of  cloud  and  mist,  and
red  and  golden  sunlight  lay  on  the  edge  of  the  horizon.  The
garden  was  still,  and  the  morning  air  stirred  the  trees  which
in  the  dark  night  had  seemed  to  keep  watch  over  the  dead,
as  through  the  unguarded  entrance,  by  which  lay  "  the  very
great  stone  "  rolled  away,  John  passed,  and  "  stooping  down  "
into  the  inner  cave  "  saw  the  linen  clothes  lying."  "  Then
cometh  Simon  Peter,"  not  to  wait  in  the  outer  cave,  but  to  go
into  the  sepulchre,  presently  to  be  followed  thither  by  John.
For  that  empty  sepulchre  was  not  a  place  to  look  into,  but  to
go  into  and  believe.  That  morn  had  witnessed  many  wonders
— wonders  which  made  the  Magdalene  long  for  yet  greater —
for  the  wonder  of  wonders,  the  Lord  Himself.  Nor  was  she
disappointed.  He  Who  alone  could  answer  her  questions
fully,  and  dry  her  tears,  spake  first  to  her  who  loved  so  much.
Thus  also  did  our  blessed  Lord  Himself  fulfil  most  truly
that  on  which  the  law  and  Jewish  tradition  laid  so  great
stress :  to  comfort  the  mourners  in  their  affliction  (comp.


In  Death  and  after  Death.  173

James  i.  27).  Indeed,  tradition  has  it,  that  there  was  in  the
Temple  a  special  gate  by  which  mourners  entered,  that  all
who  met  them  might  discharge  this  duty  of  love.  There  was
a  custom,  which  deserves  general  imitation,  that  mourners
were  not  to  be  tormented  by  talk,  but  that  all  should  ob-
serve silence  till  addressed  by  them.  Afterwards,  to  obviate
foolish  remarks,  a  formula  was  fixed,  according  to  which,
in  the  synagogue  the  leader  of  the  devotions,  and  in  the
house  some  one,  began  by  asking,  "Inquire  for  the  ground
of  mourning;"  upon  which  one  of  those  present — if  possible,
a  Rabbi — answered,  "God  is  a  just  Judge,"  which  meant,  that
He  had  removed  a  near  relative.  Then,  in  the  synagogue,  a
regular  fixed  formula  of  comfort  was  spoken,  while  in  the
house  kind  expressions  of  consolation  followed.

The  Rabbis  distinguish  between  the  Onen  and  the  Avcl —
the  sorrowing  or  suffering  one,  and  the  bowed  down,  fading  one*
or  mourner  ;  the  former  expression  applying  only  to  the  day
of  the  funeral,  the  latter  to  the  period  which  followed.  It  was
held,  that  the  law  of  God  only  prescribed  mourning  for  the
first  day,  which  was  that  of  death  and  burial  (Lev.  xxii.  4,  6),
while  the  other  and  longer  period  of  mourning  that  followed
was  enjoined  by  the  elders.  So  long  as  the  dead  body
was  actually  in  the  house,  it  was  forbidden  to  eat  meat
or  drink  wine,  to  put  on  the  phylacteries,  or  to  engage  in
study.  All  necessary  food  had  to  be  prepared  outside  the
house,  and  was,  if  possible,  not  to  be  eaten  in  presence  of
the  dead.  The  first  duty  was  to  rend  the  clothes,  which
might  be  done  in  one  or  more  of  the  inner  garments,
but  not  in  the  outer  dress.  The  rent  is  made  standing,
and  in  front ;  it  is  generally  about  a  hand-breadth  in
length.  In  the  case  of  parents  it  is  never  closed  up  again  ;


ij4  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

but  in  that  of  others  it  is  mended  after  the  thirtieth  day.
Immediately  after  the  body  is  carried  out  of  the  house  all
chairs  and  couches  are  reversed,  and  the  mourners  sit  (except
on  the  Sabbath,  and  on  the  Friday  only  for  one  hour)  on  the
ground  or  on  a  low  stool.  A  threefold  distinction  was  here
made.  Deep  mourning  was  to  last  for  seven  days,  of  which  the
first  three  were  those  of  "  weeping."  During  these  seven  days  it
was,  among  other  things,  forbidden  to  wash,  to  anoint  oneself,
to  put  on  shoes,  to  study,  or  to  engage  in  any  business.  After
that  followed  a  lighter  mourning  of  thirty  days.  Children  were
to  mourn  for  their  parents  a  whole  year ;  and  during  eleven
months  (so  as  not  to  imply  that  they  required  to  remain  a  full
year  in  purgatory)  to  say  the  "prayer  for  the  dead."  The
latter,  however,  does  not  contain  any  intercession  for  the
departed.  The  anniversary  of  the  day  of  death  was  also  to  be
observed.  An  apostate  from  the  Jewish  faith  was  not  to  be
mourned  ;  on  the  contrary,  white  dress  was  to  be  worn  on  the
occasion  of  his  decease,  and  other  demonstrations  of  joy  to  be
made.  It  is  well  known  under  what  exceptional  circum-
stances priests  and  the  high-priest  were  allowed  to  mourn
for  the  dead  (Lev.  xxi.  10,  n;  1-4).  In  the  case  of  the
high-priest  it  was  customary  to  say  to  him,  "  May  we  be
thy  expiation  ! "  ("  Let  us  suffer  what  ought  to  have  befallen
thee;")  to  which  he  replied,  "Be  ye  blessed  of  Heaven"
(Sank.  ii.  i).  It  is  noted  that  this  mode  of  address  to  the  high-
priest  was  intended  to  indicate  the  greatness  of  their  affec-
tion; and  the  learned  Otho  suggests  (Lexic.  Rabb.,  p.  343),
that  this  may  have  been  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle  when
he  would  have  wished  himself  Anathema  for  the  sake  of  his
brethren  (Rom.  ix.  3).  On  the  return  from  the  burial,  friends
or  neighbours  prepared  a  meal  for  the  mourners,  consisting  of


In  Death  and  after  Death.  175

bread,  hard-boiled  eggs,  and  lentils — round  and  coarse  fare ;
round  like  life,  which  is  rolling  on  unto  death.  This  was  brought
in  and  served  up  in  earthenware.  On  the  other  hand,  the
mourners'  friends  partook  of  a  funeral  meal,  at  which  no  more
than  ten  cups  were  to  be  emptied — two  before  the  meal,  five
at  it,  and  three  afterwards  (Jer.  Ber.  iii.  i).  In  modern  times
the  religious  duty  of  attending  to  the  dying,  the  dead,  and
mourners,  is  performed  by  a  special  "  holy  brotherhood,"  as
it  is  called,  which  many  of  the  most  religious  Jews  join  for
the  sake  of  the  pious  work  in  which  it  engages  them.

We  add  the  following,  which  may  be  of  interest.  It  is
expressly  allowed  (Jer.  Ber.  iii.  i),  on  Sabbaths  and  feast-
days  to  walk  beyond  the  Sabbath  limits,  and  to  do  all  need-
ful offices  for  the  dead.  This  throws  considerable  light  on
the  evangelical  account  of  the  offices  rendered  to  the  body
of  Jesus  on  the  eve  of  the  Passover.  The  chief  mourning
rites,  indeed,,  were  intermitted  on  Sabbaths  and  feast-days ;
and  one  o.f  the  most  interesting,  and  perhaps  the  earliest
Hebrew  non-Biblical  record — the  Megillath  Taanith,  or  roll
of  fasts — mentions  a  number  of  other  days  on  which  mourning
was  prohibited,  being  the  anniversaries  of  joyous  occasions.
The  Mishnah  (Moed  K.  iii.  5-9)  contains  a  number  of  regula-
tions and  limitations  of  mourning  observances  on  greater  and
lesser  feasts,  which  we  do  not  quote,  as  possessing  little
interest  save  in  Rabbinical  casuistry.  The  loss  of  slaves  was
not  to  be  mourned.

But  what  after  death  and  in  the  judgment  ?  And  what  of
that  which  brought  in,  and  which  gives  such  terrible  mean-
ing to  death  and  the  judgment— sin  ?  It  were  idle,  and
could  only  be  painful  here  to  detail  the  various  and  dis-
cordant sayings  of  the  Rabbis,  some  of  which,  at  least,  may


176  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

admit  of  an  allegorical  interpretation.  Only  that  which  may
be  of  use  to  the  New  Testament  student  shall  be  briefly
summarised.  Both  the  Talmud  (Pes.  54  a;  Ned.  39  b),
and  the  Targum  teach  that  paradise  and  hell  were  created
before  this  world.  One  quotation  from  the  Jerusalem  Targum
(on  Gen.  iii.  24)  will  not  only  sufficiently  prove  this,  but  show
the  general  current  of  Jewish  teaching.  "  Two  thousand
years,"  we  read,  "  before  the  world  was  made,  God  created  the
Law  and  Gehenna,  and  the  Garden  of  Eden.  He  made  the
Garden  of  Eden  for  the  righteous,  that  they  might  eat  of  the
fruits  thereof,  and  delight  themselves  in  them,  because  in  this
world  they  had  kept  the  commandments  of  the  law.  But  for
the  wicked  He  prepared  Gehenna,  which  is  like  a  sharp  two-
edged  destroying  sword.  He  put  within  it  sparks  of  fire  and
burning  coals,  to  punish  the  wicked  in  the  world  to  come,
because  they  had  not  observed  the  commandments  of  the
law  in  this  world.  For  the  law  is  the  tree  of  life.  Whoso-
ever observeth  it  shall  live  and  subsist  as  the  tree  of  life."1
Paradise  and  hell  were  supposed  to  be  contiguous,  only  sepa-
rated— it  was  said,  perhaps  allegorically — by  an  handbreadth.
But  although  we  may  here  find  some  slight  resemblance  to
the  localisation  of  the  history  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus
(Luke  xvi.  25,  26),  only  those  acquainted  with  the  theological
thinking  of  the  time  can  fully  judge  what  infinite  difference
there  is  between  the  story  in  the  Gospel  and  the  pictures
drawn  in  contemporary  literature.  Witness  here  the  22nd
chapter  of  the  book  of  Enoch,  which,  as  so  many  other  passages

i  Other  Rabbinical  sayings  have  it,  that  seven  things  existed  before  the  world —
the  law,  repentance,  paradise,  hell,  the  throne  of  God,  the  name  of  the  Messiah
and  the  Temple.  At  the  same  time  the  reader  will  observe  that  the  quotation
from  the  Targum  given  in  the  text  attempts  an  allegorising,  and  therefore
rationalistic  interpretation  of  the  narrative  in  Gen.  iii.  24.


In  Death  and  ater  Death.


from  pseudo-epigraphic  and  Rabbinical  writings,  has  been
mangled  and  misquoted  by  modern  writers,  for  purposes
hostile  to  Christianity.1  The  Rabbis  seem  to  have  believed  in
a  multitude  of  heavens  —  most  of  them  holding  that  there
were  seven,  as  there  were  also  seven  departments  in  paradise,
and  as  many  in  hell.  The  pre-existence  of  the  souls  of  all
mankind  before  their  actual  appearance  upon  earth,  and  even
the  doctrine  of  the  migration  of  souls,  seem  also  to  have  been
held  —  both  probably,  however,  chiefly  as  speculative  views,
introduced  from  foreign,  non-Judaean  sources.

But  all  these  are  preliminary  and  outside  questions,  which
only  indirectly  touch  the  great  problems  of  the  human  soul
concerning  sin  and  salvation.  And  here  we  can,  in  this  place,
only  state  that  the  deeper  and  stronger  our  conviction  that  the
language,  surroundings,  and  whole  atmosphere  of  the  New
Testament  were  those  of  Palestine  at  the  time  when  our  Lord
trod  its  soil,  the  more  startling  appears  the  contrast  between
the  doctrinal  teaching  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  and  that  of
the  Rabbis.  In  general,  it  may  be  said  that  the  New  Testa-
ment teaching  concerning  original  sin  and  its  consequences
finds  no  analogy  in  the  Rabbinical  writings  of  that  period.
As  to  the  mode  of  salvation,  their  doctrine  may  be  broadly
summed  up  under  the  designation  of  work-righteousness.

In  view  of  this  there  is,  strictly  speaking,  logical  incon-
sistency in  the  earnestness  with  which  the  Rabbis  insist  on
universal  and  immediate  repentance,  and  the  need  of  confession
of  sin,  and  of  preparation  for  another  world.  For,  a  paradise

1  We  must  take  this  opportunity  of  referring  to  a  book  which  has  long  served  as
chief  storehouse  to  certain  writers,  and  been  too  often  carelessly  accepted  as  absolute
authority  by  those  who  should  have  ascertained  tor  themselves  the  accuracy  of  quo-
tations. We  are  alluding  to  Gfrorer,  Gesch.  d.  Urchrist.  where  the  passage  from
Enoch  xxii.  is  certainly  misquoted.

N


1 78  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

which  might  be  entered  by  all  on  their  own  merits,  and  which
yet  is  to  be  sought  by  all  through  repentance  and  similar
means,  or  else  can  only  be  obtained  after  passing  through  a
kind  of  purgatory,  constitutes  no  mean  moral  charge  against
the  religion  of  Rabbinism.  Yet  such  inconsistencies  may
be  hailed  as  bringing  the  Synagogue,  in  another  direction,
nearer  to  Biblical  truth.  Indeed,  we  come  occasionally  upon
much  that  also  appears,  only  in  quite  another  setting,  in  the
New  Testament.  Thus  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  about  the
immortality  of  the  righteous  was,  of  course,  quite  consonant
with  that  of  the  Pharisees.  In  fact,  their  contention  also  was,
that  the  departed  saints  were  in  Scripture  called  "living"  (Ber.
1 8  a).1  Similarly,  it  was  their  doctrine  (Ber.  17  a,  and  in  several
other  passages) — though  not  quite  consistently  held — as  it-
was  that  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  xxii.  30),  that  "  in  the  world  to
come  there  is  neither  eating  nor  drinking,  neither  fruitfulness
nor  increase,  neither  trade  nor  business,  neither  envy,  hatred,
nor  strife ;  but  the  righteous  sit  with  their  crowns  on  their
heads,  and  feast  themselves  on  the  splendour  of  the  Shechinah,
as  it  is  written,  *  They  saw  God,  and  did  eat  and  drink'  (Ex.
xxiv.  11)."  The  following  is  so  similar  in  form  and  yet  so
different  in  spirit  to  the  parable  of  the  invited  guests  and  him

i  I  would  here  take  leave  generally  to  refer  to  my  article  on  "  Sickness
and  Death,"  in  The  Bible  Educator,  vol.  iv.  pp.  330-333.  In  Sank.  90  b,
91  a  and  b,  we  have  long  argumentations  in  which  the  doctrines  of  immortality
and  of  the  resurrection  are  proved  in  controversy,  chiefly  with  the  Sadducees,
but  also  with  heathens,  from  the  law,  the  prophets,  and  the  hagiographa.  The
passages  quoted  are  (in  Mechilta,  Ex.  xv.  I,  which  is  rendered:  "Then  Moses
shall  sing ")  :  Deut.  xxxi.  6 ;  xi.  21  ;  iv.  4 ;  Numb,  xviii.  28 ;  Ex.  vi.  4 ;
Numb.  xv.  31  ;  Ex.  xv.  i.  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  39;  Isa.  xxvi.  19;  Hi.  8;  Cant.  vii.  9  ;
Ps.  Ixxii.  1 6  ;  Ixxxiv.  7  (the  tense  being  in  this,  as  in  other  of  the  quotations,  made
future].  Similar  reasoning  on  the  subject  is  found  in  Abod.  S.  18  a  ;  Pes.  68  a  ;
Sank.  92  b  ;  and  in  many  of  the  Midrashim.


In  Death  and  after  Death.  179

without  the  wedding  garment  (Matt.  xxii.  1-14),  that  we  give
it  in  full.  "  R.  Jochanan,  son  of  Saccai,  propounded  a  parable.
A  certain  king  prepared  a  banquet,  to  which  he  invited  his
servants,  without  however  having  fixed  the  time  for  it.  Those
among  them  who  were  wise  adorned  themselves,  and  sat  down
at  the  door  of  the  king's  palace,  reasoning  thus  :  Can  there  be
anything  awanting  in  the  palace  of  a  king  ?  But  those  of
them  who  were  foolish  went  away  to  their  work,  saying :  Is
there  ever  a  feast  without  labour  ?  Suddenly  the  king  called
his  servants  to  the  banquet.  The  wise  appeared  adorned,  but
the  foolish  squalid.  Then  the  king  rejoiced  over  the  wise,
but  was  very  wroth  with  the  foolish,  and  said :  Those  who
have  adorned  themselves  shall  sit  down,  eat,  drink,  and  be
merry ;  but  those  who  have  not  adorned  themselves  shall
stand  by  and  see  it,  as  it  is  written  in  Isa.  Ixv.  13."  A  some-
what similar  parable,  but  even  more  Jewish  in  its  dogmatic
cast,  is  the  following :  "  The  matter  (of  the  world  to  come)
is  like  an  earthly  king  who  committed  to  his  servants  the
royal  robes.  They  who  were  wise  folded  and  laid  them  up
in  the  wardrobes,  but  they  who  were  careless  put  them  on,
and  did  in  them  their  work.  After  some  days  the  king  asked
back  his  robes.  Those  who  were  wise  restored  them  as  they
were,  that  is,  still  clean  ;  those  who  were  foolish  also  restored
them  as  they  were,  that  is,  soiled.  Then  the  king  rejoiced  over
the  wise,  but  was  very  wroth  with  the  careless  servants,  and  he
said  to  the  wise :  Lay  up  the  robes  in  the  treasury,  and  go
home  in  peace.  But  to  the  careless  he  commanded  the
robes  to  be  given,  that  they  might  wash  them,  and  that  they
themselves  should  be  cast  into  prison,  as  it  is  written  of  the
bodies  of  the  just  in  Isa.  Ivii.  2  ;  I  Sam.  xxv.  29,  but  of  the
bodies  of  the  unjust  in  Isa.  xlviii.  22  ;  Ivii.  21  ;  and  in  I  Sam.


180  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

xxv.  29."  From  the  same  tractate  (Shab.  152  a),  we  may,  in
conclusion,  quote  the  following  :  "  R.  Eliezer  said,  Repent  on
the  day  before  thou  diest.  His  disciples  asked  him  :  Can  a
man  know  the  hour  of  his  death?  He  replied:  Therefore
let  him  repent  to-day,  lest  haply  he  die  on  the  morrow."

Quotations  on  these,  and  discussions  on  kindred  subjects
might  lead  us  far  beyond  our  present  scope.  But  the  second
of  the  parables  above  quoted  will  point  the  direction  of  the
final  conclusions  at  which  Rabbinism  arrived.  It  is  not,  as
in  the  Gospel,  pardon  and  peace,  but  labour  with  the  "  may
be  "  of  reward.  As  for  the  "  after  death,"  paradise,  hell,  the
resurrection,  and  the  judgment,  voices  are  more  discordant
than  ever,  opinions  more  unscriptural,  and  descriptions  more
repulsively  fabulous.  This  is  not  the  place  farther  to  trace
the  doctrinal  views  of  the  Rabbis,  to  attempt  to  arrange  and
to  follow  them  up.  Work-righteousness  and  study  of  the  law
are  the  surest  key  to  heaven.  There  is  a  kind  of  purgation,
if  not  of  purgatory,  after  death.  Some  seem  even  to  have
held  the  annihilation  of  the  wicked.  Taking  the  widest  and
most  generous  views  of  the  Rabbis,  they  may  be  thus
summed  up  :  All  Israel  have  share  in  the  world  to  come  ;
the  pious  among  the  Gentiles  also  have  part  in  it.  Only  the
perfectly  just  enter  at  once  into  paradise  ;  all  the  rest  pass
through  a  period  of  purification  and  perfection,  variously
lasting,  up  to  one  year.  But  notorious  breakers  of  the  law,
and  especially  apostates  from  the  Jewish  faith,  and  heretics,
have  no  hope  whatever,  either  here  or  hereafter  !  Such  is  the
last  word  which  the  Synagogue  has  to  say  to  mankind.

Not  thus  are  we  taught  by  the  Messiah,  the  King  of  the
Jews.  If  we  learn  our  loss,  we  also  learn  that  "  The  Son  of
Man  has  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  Our


In  Death  and  after  Death.  181

righteousness  is  that  freely  bestowed  on  us  by  Him  "  Who  was
wounded  for  our  transgressions  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities."
"  With  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  The  law  which  we  obey  is
that  which  He  has  put  within  our  hearts,  by  which  we  become
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  The  Dayspring  from  on  high
hath  visited  us  "  through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God.  The
Gospel  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light,  for  we
know  Whom  we  have  believed  ;  and  "  perfect  love  casteth  out
fear."  Not  even  the  problems  of  sickness,  sorrow,  suffering,
and  death  are  unnoticed.  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,
but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning."  The  tears  of  earth's  night
hang  as  dewdrops  on  flower  and  tree,  presently  to  sparkle
like  diamonds  in  the  morning  sun.  For,  in  that  night  of
nights  has  Christ  mingled  the  sweat  of  human  toil  and  sorrow
with  the  precious  blood  of  His  agony,  and  made  it  drop  on
earth  as  sweet  balsam  to  heal  its  wounds,  to  soothe  its
sorrows,  and  to  take  away  its  death.


CHAPTER   XI.

JEWISH  VIEWS   ON   TRADE,  TRADESMEN,   AND   TRADES'

GUILDS.

WE  read  in  the  Mishnah  (Kidd.  iv.  14)  as  follows :
"  Rabbi  Meir  said  :  Let  a  man  always  teach  his  son
a  cleanly  and  a  light  trade  ;  and  let  him  pray  to  Him  whose
are  wealth  and  riches  ;  for  there  is  no  trade  which  has  not
both  poverty  and  riches,  and  neither  does  poverty  come  from
the  trade  nor  yet  riches,  but  everything  according  to  one's
deserving  (merit).  Rabbi  Simeon,  the  son  of  Eleazer,  said  :
Hast  thou  all  thy  life  long  seen  a  beast  or  a  bird  which  has  a
trade  ?  Still  they  are  nourished,  and  that  without  anxious
care.  And  if  they,  who  are  created  only  to  serve  me,  shall
not  I  expect  to  be  nourished  without  anxious  care,  who
am  created  to  serve  my  Maker  ?  Only  that  if  I  have
been  evil  in  my  deeds,  I  forfeit  my  support.1  Abba  Gurjan
of  Zadjan  said,  in  name  of  Abba  Gurja  :  Let  not  a  man
bring  up  his  son  to  be  a  donkey-driver,  nor  a  camel-driver,
nor  a  barber,  nor  a  sailor,  nor  a  shepherd,  nor  a  pedlar ;  for
their  occupations  are  those  of  thieves.  In  his  name,  Rabbi
Jehudah  said  :  Donkey-drivers  are  mostly  wicked  ;  camel-
drivers  mostly  honest ;  sailors  mostly  pious  ;  the  best  among
physicians  is  for  Gehenna,  and  the  most  honest  of  butchers  a

1  The  Jerusalem  Talmud  on  this  Mishnah  rather  mars  its  beauty  by  details.


Trade,   Tradesmen,  and  Trades'  Guilds.          183

companion  of  Amalek.  Rabbi  Nehorai  said  :  I  let  alone
every  trade  of  this  world,  and  teach  my  son  nothing  but  the
Thorah  ;*  for  a  man  eats  of  the  fruit  of  it  in  this  world  (as  it
were,  lives  upon  earth  on  the  interest),  while  the  capita)
remaineth  for  the  world  to  come.  But  what  is  left  over  (what
remains)  in  every  trade  (or  worldly  employment)  is  not  so.
For,  if  a  man  fall  into  ill-health,  or  come  to  old  age  or  into
trouble  (chastisement),  and  is  no  longer  able  to  stick  to  his
work,  lo  !  he  dies  of  hunger.  But  the  Thorah  is  not  so,  for  it
keeps  a  man  from  evil  in  youth,  and  in  old  age  gives  him  both
a  hereafter  and  the  hopeful  waiting  for  it.  What  does  it  say
about  youth  ?  '  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew
strength.'  And  what  about  old  age  ?  '  They  shall  still  bring
forth  fruit  in  old  age.'  And  this  is  what  is  said  of  Abraham
our  father :  *  And  Abraham  was  old,  and  Jehovah  blessed
Abraham  in  all  things.'  But  we  find  that  Abraham  our
father  kept  the  whole  Thorah — the  whole,  even  to  that  which
had  not  yet  been  given — as  it  is  said,  *  Because  that  Abraham
obeyed  My  voice,  and  kept  My  charge,  My  commandments,
My  statutes,  and  My  laws.' "

If  this  quotation  has  been  long,  it  will  in  many  respects
prove  instructive  ;  for  it  not  only  affords  a  favourable  specimen
of  Mishnic  teaching,  but  gives  insight  into  the  principles,  the
reasoning,  and  the  views  of  the  Rabbis.  At  the  outset,  the
saying  of  Rabbi  Simeon — which,  however,  we  should  remem-
ber, was  spoken  nearly  a  century  after  the  time  when  our
Lord  had  been  upon  earth — reminds  us  of  His  own  words
(Matt.  vi.  26) :  "  Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air  :  for  they  sow  not,
neither  do  they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns  ;  yet  your  heavenly
Father  feedeth  them.  Are  ye  not  much  better  than  they  ?"

1  The  law  of  God.


184  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

It  would  be  a  delightful  thought,  that  our  Lord  had  thus
availed  Himself  of  the  better  thinking  and  higher  feeling  in
Israel;  so  to  speak,  polished  the  diamond  and  made  it
sparkle,  as  He  held  it  up  in  the  light  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
For  here  also  it  holds  true,  that  the  Saviour  came  not  in  any
sense  to  "  destroy,"  but  to  "  establish  the  law."  All  around
the  scene  of  His  earthly  ministry  the  atmosphere  was  Jew-
ish ;  and  all  that  was  pure,  true,  and  good  in  the  nation's
life,  teaching,  and  sayings  He  made  His  own.  On  every
page  of  the  gospels  we  come  upon  what  seems  to  waken
the  echoes  of  Jewish  voices ;  sayings  which  remind  us  of
what  we  have  heard  among  the  sages  of  Israel.  And  this  is
just  what  we  should  have  expected,  and  what  gives  no  small
confirmation  of  the  trustworthiness  of  these  narratives  as  the
record  of  what  had  really  taken  place.  It  is  not  a  strange
scene  upon  which  we  are  here  introduced  ;  nor  among  strange
actors  ;  nor  are  the  surroundings  foreign.  Throughout  we
have  a  life-picture  of  the  period,  in  which  we  recognise  the
speakers  from  the  sketches  of  them  drawn  elsewhere,  and
whose  mode  of  speaking  we  know  from  contemporary  litera-
ture. The  gospels  could  not  have  set  aside,  they  could  not
even  have  left  out,  the  Jewish  element.  Otherwise  they  would
not  have  been  true  to  the  period,  nor  to  the  people,  nor  to  the
writers,  nor  yet  to  that  law  of  growth  and  development  which
always  marks  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  In  one
respect  only  all  is  different.  The  gospels  are  most  Jewish  in
form,  but  most  anti-Jewish  in  spirit — the  record  of  the  mani-
festation among  Israel  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  of  the
world,  as  the  "  King  of  the  Jews." *

1  The  elaboration  and  proof  of  this  must  be  left  for  a  work  entering  fully  on  the
life  and  times  of  our  Lord.


Trade,    Tradesmen,  and  Trades    G^dlds.          185

This  influence  of  the  Jewish  surroundings  upon  the  circunv
stances  of  the  gospel  history  has  a  most  important  bearing.
It  helps  us  to  realise  what  Jewish  life  had  been  at  the  time  of
Christ,  and  to  comprehend  what  might  seem  peculiarities  in
the  gospel  narrative.  Thus — to  come  to  the  subject  of  this
chapter — we  now  understand  how  so  many  of  the  disciples
and  followers  of  the  Lord  gained  their  living  by  some  craft ;
how  in  the  same  spirit  the  Master  Himself  condescended  to
the  trade  of  His  adoptive  father  ;  and  how  the  greatest  of  His
apostles  throughout  earned  his  bread  by  the  labour  of  his
hands,  probably  following,  like  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  trade  of
his  father.  For  it  was  a  principle,  frequently  expressed,  if
possible  "  not  to  forsake  the  trade  of  the  father  " — most  likely
not  merely  from  worldly  considerations,  but  because  it  might  be
learned  in  the  house;  perhaps  even  from  considerations  of  re-
spect for  parents.  And  what  in  this  respect  Paul  practised,  that
he  also  preached.  Nowhere  is  the  dignity  of  labour  and  the
manly  independence  of  honest  work  more  clearly  set  forth  than
in  his  Epistles.  At  Corinth,  his  first  search  seems  to  have  been
for  work  (Acts  xviii.  3)  ;  and  through  life  he  steadily  forbore
availing  himself  of  his  right  to  be  supported  by  the  Church,
deeming  it  his  great  "  reward  "  to  "  make  the  Gospel  of  Christ
without  charge  "  (i  Cor.  ix.  18).  Nay,  to  quote  his  impassioned
language,  he  would  far  rather  have  died  of  hard  work  than
that  any  man  should  deprive  him  of  this  "  glorying."  And  so
presently  at  Ephesus  "  these  hands"  minister  not  only  unto
his  own  necessities,  but  also  to  them  that  were  with  him  ;  and
that  for  the  twofold  reason  of  supporting  the  weak,  and  of
following  the  Master,  however  "  afar  off,"  and  entering  into
this  joy  of  His,  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive"
(Acts  xx.  34,  35).  Again,  so  to  speak,  it  does  one's  heart  good


i  86  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

when  coming  in  contact  with  that  Church  which  seemed  most
in  danger  of  dreamy  contemplativeness,  and  of  unpractical,  if
not  dangerous,  speculations  about  the  future,  to  hear  what  a
manly,  earnest  tone  also  prevailed  there.  Here  is  the  preacher
himself !  Not  a  man-pleaser,  but  a  God-server  ;  not  a  flatterer,
nor  covetous,  nor  yet  seeking  glory,  nor  courting  authority,
like  the  Rabbis.  What  then  ?  This  is  the  sketch  as  drawn
from  life  at  Thessalonica,  so  that  each  who  had  known  him
must  have  recognised  it :  most  loving,  like  a  nursing  mother,
who  cherisheth  her  own  children,  so  in  tenderness  willing  to
impart  not  only  the  Gospel  of  God,  but  his  own  life.  Yet,
with  it  all,  no  mawkishness,  no  sentimentality  ;  but  all  stern,
genuine  reality  ;  and  the  preacher  himself  is  "  labouring  night
and  day,"  because  he  would  not  be  chargeable  to  any  of  them,
while  he  preached  unto  them  the  Gospel  of  God  (i  Thess.  ii.  9).
"  Night  and  day,"  hard,  unremitting,  uninteresting  work,  which
some  would  have  denounced  or  despised  as  secular  !  But  to
Paul  that  wretched  distinction,  the  invention  of  modern  super-
ficialism  and  unreality,  existed  not.  For  to  the  spiritual
nothing  is  secular,  and  to  the  secular  nothing  is  spiritual.
Work  night  and  day,  and  then  as  his  rest,  joy,  and  reward,  to
preach  in  public  and  in  private  the  unsearchable  riches  of
Christ,  Who  had  redeemed  him  with  His  precious  blood.  And
so  his  preaching,  although  one  of  its  main  burdens  seems  to
have  been  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord,  was  in  no  way
calculated  to  make  the  hearers  apocalyptic  dreamers,  who
discussed  knotty  points  and  visions  of  the  future,  while
present  duty  lay  unheeded  as  beneath  them,  on  a  lower
platform.  There  is  a  ring  of  honest  independence,  of  healthy
manly  piety,  of  genuine,  self-denying  devotion  to  Christ,  and
also  of  a  practical  life  of  holiness,  in  this  admonition  (i  Thess.


Trade,    Tradesmen,  and  Trades    Guilds.          187

iv.  n,  12)  :  "Make  it  your  ambition  to  be  quiet,  to  do  your
own  "  (each  one  for  himself,  not  meddling  with  others'  affairs),
"  and  to  work  with  your  hands,  as  we  commanded  you,  that
ye  may  walk  decorously  towards  them  without,  and  have  no
need  of  any  one"1  (be  independent  of  all  men).  And,  very
significantly,  this  plain,  practical  religion  is  placed  in  imme-
diate conjunction  with  the  hope  of  the  resurrection  and  of  the
coming  again  of  our  Lord  (vers.  13-18).  The  same  admonition,
"  to  work,  and  eat  their  own  bread,"  comes  once  again,  only  in
stronger  language,  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,
reminding  them  in  this  of  his  own  example,  and  of  his  command
when  with  them,  "  that,  if  any  would  not  work,  neither  should
he  eat;"  at  the  same  time  sternly  rebuking  "some  who  are
walking  disorderly, who  are  not  at  all  busy,  but  are  busybodies."2
Now,  we  certainly  do  not  pretend  to  find  a  parallel  to
St.  Paul  among  even  the  best  and  the  noblest  of  the  Rabbis.
Yet  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  Jew,  not  merely  trained  at  the  feet
of  the  great  Gamaliel,  "  that  sun  in  Israel,"  but  deeply  imbued
with  the  Jewish  spirit  and  lore;  insomuch  that  long  afterwards,
when  he  is  writing  of  the  deepest  mysteries  of  Christianity,  we
catch  again  and  again  expressions  that  remind  us  of  some  that
occur  in  the  earliest  record  of  that  secret  Jewish  doctrine,  which
was  only  communicated  to  the  most  select  of  the  select  sages.3
And  this  same  love  of  honest  labour,  the  same  spirit  of  manly
independence,  the  same  horror  of  trafficking  with  the  law,  and
using  it  either  "as  a  crown  or  as  a  spade,"  was  certainly
characteristic  of  the  best  Rabbis.  Quite  different  in  this

1  So  literally.

2  We  have  here  tried  to  reproduce  the  play  on  the  words  in  the  original.

3  We  mean  the  book  Jezirah.     It  is  curious  that  this  should  have  never  bee*
noticed.     The  coincidences  are  not  in  substance,  but  in  modes  of  expression.


1 88  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

respect  also — far  asunder  as  were  the  aims  of  their  lives — were
the  feelings  of  Israel  from  those  of  the  Gentiles  around.  The
philosophers  of  Greece  and  Rome  denounced  manual  labour
as  something  degrading  ;  indeed,  as  incompatible  with  the
full  exercise  of  the  privileges  of  a  citizen.  Those  Romans
who  allowed  themselves  not  only  to  be  bribed  in  their  votes,
but  expected  to  be  actually  supported  at  the  public  expense,
would  not  stoop  to  the  defilement  of  work.  The  Jews  had
another  aim  in  life,  another  pride  and  ambition.  It  is
difficult  to  give  an  idea  of  the  seeming  contrasts  united  in
them.  Most  aristocratic  and  exclusive,  contemptuous  of  mere
popular  cries,  yet  at  the  same  time  most  democratic  and
liberal;  law-abiding,  and  with  the  profoundest  reverence  for
authority  and  rank,  and  yet  with  this  prevailing  conviction
at  bottom,  that  all  Israel  were  brethren,  and  as  such  stood
on  precisely  the  same  level,  the  eventual  differences  arising
only  from  this,  that  the  mass  failed  to  realise  what  Israel's
real  vocation  was,  and  how  it  was  to  be  attained,  viz.,  by
theoretical  and  practical  engagement  with  the  law,  com-
pared to  which  everything  else  was  but  secondary  and
unimportant.

But  this  combination  of  study  with  honest  manual  labour —
the  one  to  support  the  other — had  not  been  always  equally
honoured  in  Israel.  We  distinguish  here  three  periods.  The
law  of  Moses  evidently  recognised  the  dignity  of  labour,  and
this  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament  appeared  in  the  best  times  of
the  Jewish  nation.  The  book  of  Proverbs,  which  contains  so
many  sketches  of  what  a  happy,  holy  home  in  Israel  had  been,
is  full  of  the  praises  of  domestic  industry.  But  the  Apocrypha,
notably  Ecclesiasticus  (xxxviii.  24-31),  strike  a  very  different
key-note.  Analysing  one  by  one  every  trade,  the  contemp-


Trade,    Tradesmen,  and  Trades    Guilds.        189

tuous  question  is  put,  how  such  "can  get  wisdom?"  This
"Wisdom  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  Sirach"  dates  from  about  two
centuries  before  the  present  era.  It  would  not  have  been
possible  at  the  time  of  Christ  or  afterwards,  to  have  written
in  such  terms  of  "the  carpenter  and  workmaster,"  of  them
"that  cut  and  grave  seals,"  of  "the  smith,"  or  "the  potter;"  nor
to  have  said  of  them  :  "  They  shall  not  be  sought  for  in  public
counsel,  nor  sit  high  in  the  congregation  ;  they  shall  not  sit  on
the  judges'  seat,  nor  understand  the  sentence  of  judgment ;
they  cannot  declare  justice  and  judgment ;  and  they  shall  not
be  found  where  parables  are  spoken"  (Ecclus.  xxxviii.  33).
For,  in  point  of  fact,  with  few  exceptions,  all  the  leading
Rabbinical  authorities  were  working  at  some  trade,  till  at  last
it  became  quite  an  affectation  to  engage  in  hard  bodily  labour,
so  that  one  Rabbi  would  carry  his  own  chair  every  day  to
college,  while  others  would  drag  heavy  rafters,  or  work  in  some
such  fashion.1  Without  cumbering  these  pages  with  names,
it  is  worth  mentioning,  perhaps  as  an  extreme  instance,  that
on  one  occasion  a  man  was  actually  summoned  from  his  trade
of  stone-cutter  to  the  high-priestly  office.  To  be  sure,  that
was  in  revolutionary  times.  The  high-priests  under  the
Herodian  dynasty  were  of  only  too  different  a  class,  and  their
history  possesses  a  tragic  interest,  as  bearing  on  the  state
and  fate  of  the  nation.  Still,  the  great  Hillel  was  a  wood-
cutter, his  rival  Shammai  a  carpenter;  and  among  the  cele-
brated Rabbis  of  after  times  we  find  shoemakers,  tailors,
carpenters,  sandalmakers,  smiths,  potters,  builders,  etc. — in
short,  every  variety  of  trade.  Nor  were  they  ashamed  of  their
manual  labour.  Thus  it  is  recorded  of  one  of  them,  that  he

1  Compare  Professor  Delitzsch's  beautiful  tractate,  Jiid.  Hattdwerkerleben  zur
Zeit  Jesu  "  (p.  75),  to  which  we  would  here  generally  acknowledge  our  obligations.


i  go  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

was  in  the  habit  of  discoursing  to  his  students  from  the  top  of
a  cask  of  his  own  making,  which  he  carried  every  day  to  the
academy.

We  can  scarcely  wonder  at  this,  since  it  was  a  Rabbinical
•principle,  that  "  whoever  does  not  teach  his  son  a  trade  is  as
if  he  brought  him  up  to  be  a  robber"  (Kidd.  29).  The  Mid-
rash  gives  the  following  curious  paraphrase  of  Eccles.  ix.  9,
"Behold,  the  life  with  the  wife  whom  thou  lovest:"1  Look  out
for  a  trade  along  with  the  Divine  study  which  thou  lovest.  "How
highly  does  the  Maker  of  the  world  value  trades,"  is  another
saying.  Here  are  some  more :  "There  is  none  whose  trade  God
does  not  adorn  with  beauty."  "Though  there  were  seven
years  of  famine,  it  will  never  come  to  the  door  of  the  trades-
man." "  There  is  not  a  trade  to  which  both  poverty  and  riches
are  not  joined  ;  for  there  is  nothing  more  poor,  and  nothing
more  rich,  than  a  trade."  "No  trade  shall  ever  disappear
from  the  world.  Happy  he  whom  his  teacher  has  brought  up
to  a  good  trade  ;  alas  for  him  who  has  been  put  into  a  bad
one."2  Perhaps  these  are  comparatively  later  Rabbinical
sayings.  But  let  us  turn  to  the  Mishnah  itself,  and  especially
to  that  tractate  which  professedly  embodies  the  wisdom  and
the  sayings  of  the  fathers  (Aboth).  Shemaajah,  the  teacher
of  Hillel,  has  this  cynical  saying  (Ab.  i.  10) — perhaps  the
outcome  of  his  experience :  "  Love  work,  hate  Rabbiship,
and  do  not  press  on  the  notice  of  those  in  power."  The
views  of  the  great  Hillel  himself  have  been  quoted  in  a
previous  chapter.  Rabbi  Gamaliel,  the  son  of  Jehudah  the
Nasi,  said  (Ab.  ii.  2):  "Fair  is  the  study  of  the  law,  if
accompanied  by  worldly  occupation  :  to  engage  in  them  both

1  So  literally  in  the  Hebrew.

*  Compare  Hamburger,  Real.  Encycl.  p.  497,  where  these  sayings  are  collated.


Trade,    Tradesmen,  and  Trades    Guilds.

is  to  keep  away  sin  ;  while  study  which  is  not  combined  with
work  must  in  the  end  be  interrupted,  and  only  brings  sin  with
it."  Rabbi  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Asarjah,  says,  among  other
things  :  "  Where  there  is  no  worldly  support  (literally,  no
meal,  no  flour),  there  is  no  study  of  the  law ;  and  where
there  is  no  study  of  the  law,  worldly  support  is  of  no  value  "
(Ab.  iii.  21).  It  is  worth  while  to  add  what  immediately
follows  in  the  Mishnah.  Its  resemblance  to  the  simile  about
the  rock,  and  the  building  upon  it,  as  employed  by  our  Lord
(Matt.  vii.  24 ;  Luke  vi.  47),  is  so  striking,  that  we  quote  it  in
illustration  of  previous  remarks  on  this  subject.  We  read  as
follows  :  "  He  whose  knowledge  exceeds  his  works,  to  whom
is  he  like  ?  He  is  like  a  tree,  whose  branches  are  many  and
its  roots  few,  and  the  wind  cometh,  and  uproots  the  tree
and  throws  it  upon  its  face,  as  it  is  said  (Jer.  xvii.  6).  .  .  .  a
But  he  whose  works  exceed  his  knowledge,  to  whom  is  he
like  ?  To  a  tree  whose  branches  are  few,  but  its  roots  many;
and  if  even  all  the  winds  that  are  in  the  world  came  and
set  upon  such  a  tree,  they  would  not  move  it  from  its  place,
as  it  is  written  (Jer.  xvii.  8)."  We  have  given  this  saying
in  its  earliest  form.  Even  so,  it  should  be  remembered  that  it
dates  from  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  It  occurs  in  a
still  later  form  in  the  Babylon  Talmud  (Sank.  99  a).  But
what  is  most  remarkable  is,  that  it  also  appears  in  yet
another  work,  and  in  a  form  almost  identical  with  that  in  the
New  Testament,  so  far  as  the  simile  of  the  building  is  con-
cerned. In  this  form  it  is  attributed  to  a  Rabbi  who  is
stigmatised  as  an  apostate,  and  as  the  type  of  apostasy,  and
who,  as  such,  died  under  the  ban.  The  inference  seems  to
be,  that  if  he  did  not  profess  some  form  of  Christianity,
he  had  at  least  derived  this  saying  from  his  intercourse  with


1 9  i  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Christians.1  But  irrespective  of  this,  two  things  are  plain  on
comparison  of  the  saying  in  its  Rabbinical  and  in  its  Christian
form.  First,  in  the  parable  as  employed  by  our  Lord,  every-
thing is  referred  to  Him  ;  and  the  essential  difference  ulti-
mately depends  upon  our  relationship  towards  Him.  The
comparison  here  is  not  between  much  study  and  little  work,
or  little  Talmudical  knowledge  and  much  work  ;  but  between
coming  to  Him  and  hearing  these  sayings  of  His,  and  then
either  doing  or  else  not  doing  them.  Secondly,  such  an  alter-
native is  never  presented  by  Christianity  as,  on  the  one  hand,
much  knowledge  and  few  works,  and  on  the  other,  little
knowledge  and  many  works.  But  in  Christianity  the  vital
difference  lies  between  works  and  no  works  ;  between  ab-
solute life  and  absolute  death ;  all  depending  upon  this,
whether  a  man  has  digged  down  to  the  right  foundation,
and  built  upon  the  rock  which  is  Christ,  or  has  tried  to  build
up  the  walls  of  his  life  without  such  foundation.  Thus  the
very  similarity  of  the  saying  in  its  Rabbinical  form  brings
out  all  the  more  clearly  the  essential  difference  and  con-
trariety in  spirit  existing  between  Rabbinism,  even  in  its
purest  form,  and  the  teaching  of  our  Lord.

The  question  of  the  relation  between  the  best  teaching  of
the  Jewish  sages  and  some  of  the  sayings  of  our  Lord  is  of
such  vital  importance,  that  this  digression  will  not  seem  out
of  place.  A  few  further  quotations  bearing  on  the  dignity
of  labour  may  be  appropriate.  The  Talmud  has  a  beautiful

1  Elishaben  Abbuja,  called  Acher,  "the  other,"  on  account  of  his  apostasy.
The  history  of  that  Rabbi  is  altogether  deeply  interesting.  We  can  only  put  the
question  :  Was  he  a  Christian,  or  merely  tainted  with  Gnosticism  ?  The  latter
seems  to  us  the  most  probable.  His  errors  are  traced  by  the  Jews  to  his  study  of
the  Kabbalah.


Trade,    Tradesmen,  and  Trades'  Guilds.       193

Haggadah,  which  tells  how,  when  Adam  heard  this  sentence
of  his  Maker :  "  Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth
to  thee,"  he  burst  into  tears.  "  What ! "  he  exclaimed  ;  "  Lord
of  the  world,  am  I  then  to  eat  out  of  the  same  manger  with
the  ass  ?"  But  when  he  heard  these  additional  words  :  "  In
the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread,"  his  heart  was
comforted.  For  herein  lies  (according  to  the  Rabbis)  the
dignity  of  labour,  that  man  is  not  forced  to,  nor  unconscious
in,  his  work  ;  but  that  while  becoming  the  servant  of  the
soil,  he  wins  from  it  the  precious  fruits  of  golden  harvest.
And  so,  albeit  labour  may  be  hard,  and  the  result  doubtful,
as  when  Israel  stood  by  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  yet  a
miracle  will  cleave  these  waters  also.  And  still  the  dignity  of
labour  is  great  in  itself :  it  reflects  honour  ;  it  nourisheth  and
cherisheth  him  that  engageth  in  it.  For  this  reason  also  did
the  law  punish  with  fivefold  restitution  the  theft  of  an  ox,
but  only  with  fourfold  that  of  a  sheep  ;  because  the  former
was  that  with  which  a  man  worked.1

Assuredly  St.  Paul  spoke  also  as  a  Jew  when  he  admonished
the  Ephesians  (Eph.  iv.  28)  :  "  Let  him  that  stole  steal  no
more  :  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the
thing  which  is  good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that
needeth."  "  Make  a  working  day  of  the  Sabbath  :  only  be  not
dependent  upon  people,"  was  the  Rabbinical  saying  (Pes.  112).
"  Skin  dead  animals  by  the  wayside,"  we  read,  "  and  take  thy
payment  for  it,  but  do  not  say,  I  am  a  priest ;  I  am  a  man
of  distinction,  and  work  is  objectionable  to  me ! "  And  to
this  day  the  common  Jewish  proverb  has  it :  "  Labour  is  no
cherpah  (disgrace) ; "  or  again  :  "  Melachah  is  berachah  (labour

1  All  these  are  Rabbinical  sayings.  Compare  the  references  in  Tcndlatt
Spruchw.  u.  Redensartcn,  p.  263.


IQ4  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

is  blessing)."  With  such  views,  we  can  understand  how
universal  industrious  pursuits  were  in  the  days  of  our
Lord.  Although  it  is  no  doubt  true,  as  the  Rabbinical
proverb  puts  it,  that  every  man  thinks  most  of  his  own
trade,  yet  public  opinion  attached  a  very  different  value
to  different  kinds  of  trade.  Some  were  avoided  on  account
of  the  unpleasantnesses  connected  with  them,  such  as  those
of  tanners,  dyers,  and  miners.  The  Mishnah  lays  it  down
as  a  principle,  that  a  man  should  not  teach  his  son  a  trade
which  necessitates  constant  intercourse  with  the  other  sex
(Kidd.  iv.  14).  Such  would  include,  among  others,  jewellers,
makers  of  handmills,  perfumers,  and  weavers.  The  latter
trade  seems  to  have  exposed  to  as  many  troubles  as  if  the
weavers  of  those  days  had  been  obliged  to  serve  a  modern
fashionable  lady.  The  saying  was  :  "A  weaver  must  be
humble,  or  his  life  will  be  shortened  by  excommunication  ;"
that  is,  he  must  submit  to  anything  for  a  living.  Or,  as  the
common  proverb  put  it  (Ab.  S.  26  a):  "If  a  weaver  is  not
humble,  his  life  is  shortened  by  a  year."  This  other  saying,
of  a  similar  kind,  reminds  us  of  the  Scotch  estimate  of,  or
rather  disrespect  for,  weavers  :  "  Even  a  weaver  is  master  in
his  own  house."  And  this  not  only  in  his  own  opinion,  but
in  that  of  his  wife  also.  For  as  the  Rabbinical  proverb  has
it :  "  Though  a  man  were  only  a  comber  of  wool,  his  wife
would  call  him  up  to  the  house-door,  and  sit  down  beside
him,"  so  proud  is  she  of  him.  Perhaps  in  the  view  of  the
Rabbis  there  was  a  little  of  female  self-consciousness  in  this
regard  for  her  husband's  credit,  for  they  have  it :  "  Though
a  man  were  only  the  size  of  an  ant,  his  wife  would  try  to
sit  down  among  the  big  ones."

In  general,  the  following  sound  views  are  expressed  in  the


Trade,    Tradesmen,  and  Traded  Guilds.       195

Talmud  (Ber.  17  a) :  "  The  Rabbi  of  Jabne  said  :  I  am  simply
a  being  like  my  neighbour.  He  works  in  the  field,  and  I  in
the  town.  We  both  rise  early  to  go  to  work  ;  and  there  is  no
cause  for  the  one  setting  himself  up  above  the  other.  Do  not
think  that  the  one  does  more  than  the  other ;  for  we  have
been  taught  that  there  is  as  much  merit  in  doing  that  which  is
little  as  that  which  is  great,  provided  the  state  of  our  hearts
be  right."  And  so  a  story  is  told,  how  one  who  dug  cisterns
and  made  baths  (for  purification)  accosted  the  great  Rabbi
Jochanan  with  the  words  :  "  I  am  as  great  a  man  as  thou  ; "
since,  in  his  own  sphere,  he  served  the  wants  of  the  com-
munity quite  as  much  as  the  most  learned  teacher  in  Israel.
In  the  same  spirit  another  Rabbi  admonished  to  strict  con-
scientiousness, since  in  a  sense  all  work,  however  humble,  was
really  work  for  God.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Jewish
tradesman  who  worked  in  such  a  spirit  would  be  alike  happy
and  skilful.

It  must  have  been  a  great  privilege  to  be  engaged  in  any
work  connected  with  the  Temple.  A  large  number  of  work-
men were  kept  constantly  employed  there,  preparing  what
was  necessary  for  the  service.  Perhaps  it  was  only  a  piece
of  Jerusalem  jealousy  of  the  Alexandrians  which  prompted
such  Rabbinical  traditions,  as,  that,  when  Alexandrians  tried
to  compound  the  incense  for  the  Temple,  the  column  of
smoke  did  not  ascend  quite  straight ;  when  they  repaired  the
large  mortar  in  which  the  incense  was  bruised,  and  again,
the  great  cymbal  with  which  the  signal  for  the  commence-
ment of  the  Temple  music  was  given,  in  each  case  their
work  had  to  be  undone  by  Jerusalem  workmen,  in  order
to  produce  a  proper  mixture,  or  to  evoke  the  former  sweet
sounds.  There  can  be  no  question,  however,  notwithstanding


196  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Palestinian  prejudices,  that  there  were  excellent  Jewish  work-
men in  Alexandria  ;  and  plenty  of  them,  too,  as  we  know
from  their  arrangement  in  guilds  in  their  great  synagogue.
Any  poor  workman  had  only  to  apply  to  his  guild,  and  he
was  supported  till  he  found  employment.  The  guild  of
coppersmiths  there  had,  as  we  are  informed,  for  their  de-
vice a  leathern  apron ;  and  when  its  members  went  abroad
they  used  to  carry  with  them  a  bed  which  could  be  taken  to
pieces.  At  Jerusalem,  where  this  guild  was  organised  under
its  Rabban,  or  chief,  it  possessed  a  synagogue  and  a  bury-
ing-place  of  its  own.1  But  the  Palestinian  workmen,  though
they  kept  by  each  other,  had  no  exclusive  guilds ;  the  prin-
ciples of  "  free  trade,"  so  to  speak,  prevailing  among  them.
Bazaars  and  streets  were  named  after  them.  The  workmen
of  Jerusalem  were  specially  distinguished  for  their  artistic
skill.  A  whole  valley — that  of  the  Tyropceon — was  occupied
by  dairies  ;  hence  its  name,  "  valley  of  cheesemongers."  Even
in  Isa.  vii.  3  we  read  of  "  the  field  of  the  fullers,"  which  lay  "  at
the  end  of  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool  in  the  highway  "
to  Joppa.  A  whole  set  of  sayings  is  expressly  designated  in
the  Talmud  as  "  the  proverbs  of  the  fullers."

From  their  love  of  building  and  splendour  the  Her^dian
princes  must  have  kept  many  tradesmen  in  constant  work.
At  the  re-erection  of  the  Temple  no  less  than  eighteen  thou-
sand were  so  employed  in  various  handicrafts,  some  of  them
implying  great  artistic  skill.  Even  before  that,  Herod  the
Great  is  said  to  have  employed  a  large  number  of  the  most
experienced  masters  to  teach  the  one  thousand  priests  who
were  to  construct  the  Holy  Place  itself.  For,  in  the  building
of  that  part  of  the  Temple  no  laymen  were  engaged.  As

1  See  Delitzsch,  u.s.  p.  38.


Trades,    Tradesmen,  and  Trades    Guilds.        197

we  know,  neither  hammer,  axe,  chisel,  nor  any  tool  of  iron
was  used  within  the  sacred  precincts.  The  reason  of  this  is
thus  explained  in  the  Mishnah,  when  describing  how  all  the
stones  for  the  altar  were  dug  out  of  virgin-earth,  no  iron  tool
being  employed  in  their  preparation  :  "  Iron  is  created  to  cut
short  the  life  of  man  ;  but  the  altar  to  prolong  it.  Hence  it
is  not  becoming  to  use  that  which  shortens  for  that  which
lengthens  "  (Midd.  iii.  4).  Those  who  know  the  magnificence
and  splendour  of  that  holy  house  will  be  best  able  to  judge
what  skill  in  workmanship  its  various  parts  must  have  required.
An  instance  may  be  interesting  on  account  of  its  connection
with  the  most  solemn  fact  of  New  Testament  history.  We
read  in  the  Mishnah  (Shek.  viii.  5) :  "  Rabbi  Simeon,  the  son
of  Gamaliel,  said,  in  the  name  of  Rabbi  Simeon,  the  son  of
the  (former)  Sagan  (assistant  of  the  high-priest)  :  The  veil  (of
the  Most  Holy  Place)  was  an  handbreadth  thick,  and  woven
of  seventy-two  twisted  plaits  ;  each  plait  consisted  of  twenty-
four  threads  "  (according  to  the  Talmud,  six  threads  of  each
of  the  four  Temple-colours — white,  scarlet,  blue,  and  gold).
"  It  was  forty  cubits  long,  and  twenty  wide  (sixty  feet  by
thirty),  and  made  of  eighty-two  myriads  "  (the  meaning  of
this  in  the  Mishnah  is  not  plain).  "  Two  of  these  veils  were
made  every  year,  and  it  took  three  hundred  priests  to  immerse
one"  (before  use).  These  statements  must  of  course  be
considered  as  dealing  in  "  round  numbers  ; "  but  they  are
most  interesting  as  helping  us  to  realise,  not  only  how  the
great  veil  of  the  Temple  was  rent,  when  the  Lord  of  that
Temple  died  on  the  cross,  but  also  how  the  occurrence
could  have  been  effectually  concealed  from  the  mass  of  the
people.

To  turn  to  quite  another  subject.     It  is  curious  to  notice  in


198  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

how  many  respects  times  and  circumstances  have  really  not
changed.  The  old  Jewish  employers  of  labour  seem  to  have
had  similar  trouble  with  their  men  to  that  of  which  so  many
in  our  own  times  loudly  complain.  We  have  an  emphatic
warning  to  this  effect,  to  beware  of  eating  fine  bread  and
giving  black  bread  to  one's  workmen  or  servants  ;  not  to  sleep
on  feathers  and  give  them  straw  pallets,  more  especially  if  they
were  co-religionists,  for,  as  it  is  added,  he  who  gets  a  Hebrew
slave  gets  his  master !  Possibly  something  of  this  kind  was
on  the  mind  of  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  this  most  needful
precept  (i  Tim.  vi.  1,2):  "  Let  as  many  servants  as  are  under
the  yoke  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all  honour,  that
the  name  of  God  and  His  doctrine  be  not  blasphemed.  And
they  that  have  believing  masters,  let  them  not  despise  them,
because  they  are  brethren  ;  but  rather  do  them  service,  because
they  are  believing  and  beloved,  partakers  of  the  benefit."  But
really  there  is  nothing  "  new  under  the  sun !  "  Something
like  the  provisions  of  a  mutual  assurance  appear  in  the  associ-
ations of  muleteers  and  sailors,  which  undertook  to  replace  a
beast  or  a  ship  that  had  been  lost  without  negligence  on  the
part  of  the  owner.  Nay,  we  can  even  trace  the  spirit  of  trade-
unionism  in  the  express  permission  of  the  Talmud  (Bab.  B.  9)
to  tradesmen  to  combine  to  work  only  one  or  two  days  in  the
week,  so  as  to  give  sufficient  employment  to  every  workman
in  a  place.  We  close  with  another  quotation  in  the  same
-direction,  which  will  also  serve  to  illustrate  the  peculiar  mode
of  Rabbinical  comment  on  the  words  of  Scripture  :  " '  He
doeth  no  evil  to  his  neighbour ' — this  refers  to  one  tradesman
not  interfering  with  the  trade  of  another  !  "


CHAPTER    XII.

COMMERCE.

r  I  "'HE  remarkable  change  which  we  have  noticed  in  the
-L  views  of  Jewish  authorities,  from  contempt  to  almost
affectation  of  manual  labour,  could  certainly  not  have  been
arbitrary.  But  as  we  fail  to  discover  here  any  religious
motive,  we  can  only  account  for  it  on  the  score  of  altered
political  and  social  circumstances.  So  long  as  the  people  were,
at  least  nominally,  independent,  and  in  possession  of  their  own
land,  constant  engagement  in  a  trade  would  probably  mark
an  inferior  social  stage,  and  imply  either  voluntary  or  neces-
sary preoccupation  with  the  things  of  this  world  that  perish
with  the  using.  It  was  otherwise  when  Judsea  was  in  the
hands  of  strangers.  Then  honest  labour  afforded  the  means,
and  the  only  means,  of  manly  independence.  To  engage  in
it,  just  sufficient  to  secure  this  result,  to  "  stand  in  need  of  no
one  ; "  to  be  able  to  hold  up  one's  head  before  friend  and  foe ;
to  make  unto  God  moral  sacrifice  of  natural  inclination,
strength  and  time,  so  as  to  be  able  freely  and  independently
to  devote  oneself  to  the  study  of  the  Divine  law,  was  a  noble
resolve.  And  it  brought  its  own  reward.  If,  on  the  one
hand,  the  alternation  of  physical  and  mental  labour  was  felt


2OO  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

to  be  healthy,  on  the  other — and  this  had  been  the  main
object  in  view — there  never  were  men  more  fearlessly  out-
spoken, more  unconcerned  as  to  mere  personality  or  as  to
consequences,  more  independent  in  thought  and  word  than
these  Rabbis.  We  can  understand  the  withering  scorn  of  St
Jude  (Jude  16)  towards  those  "having  men's  persons  in  admi-
ration," literally,  "  admiring  faces  " — an  expression  by  which
the  LXX.  translate  the  "  respect "  or  "  regard,"  or  "  accept-
ance "  of  persons  (the  nasa  panim)  mentioned  in  Lev.  xix.  1 5  ;
Deut.  x.  17  ;  Job  xiii.  10;  Prov.  xviii.  5,  and  many  other  pas-
sages. In  this  respect  also,  as  so  often,  St.  Paul  spoke  as
a  true  Jew  when  he  wrote  (Gal.  ii.  6) :  "  But  of  these  who
seemed  to  be  somewhat,  whatsoever  they  were,  it  maketh  no
matter  to  me  :  the  face  of  man  God  accepteth  not."

The  Mishnah,  indeed,  does  not  in  so  many  words  inform  us
how  the  change  in  public  feeling,  to  which  we  have  referred,
was  brought  about.  But  there  are  plenty  of  hints  to  guide
us  in  certain  short  caustic  sentences  which  would  be  inexplic-
able, unless  read  in  the  light  of  the  history  of  that  time.  Thus,
as  stated  in  the  previous  chapter,  Shemaajah  admonished :
"  Love  work,  hate  Rabbiship,  and  do  not  press  on  the  notice
of  those  in  power."  Similarly,  Avtaljon  warned  the  sages  to
be  cautious  in  their  words,  for  fear  of  incurring  banishment
for  themselves  and  their  followers  (Ab.  i.  10,  n).  And  Rabbi
Gamaliel  II.  had  it  (ii.  3)  :  "  Be  cautious  with  the  powers  that
be,  for  they  only  seek  intercourse  with  a  person  for  their
own  advantage.  They  are  as  if  they  loved  you,  when  it  serves
for  their  profit,  but  in  the  hour  of  his  need  they  do  not  stand
by  a  man."  In  the  same  category  of  sayings  for  the  times
we  may  rank  this  of  Rabbi  Matithja :  "  Meet  every  one  with
a  salutation  of  peace,  and  prefer  to  be  the  tail  of  lions,  but


Commerce.  201

be  not  the  head  to  foxes."  It  is  needless  to  multiply  similar
quotations,  all  expressive  of  an  earnest  desire  for  honourable
independence  through  personal  exertion.

Quite  different  from  those  as  to  trades  were  the  Rabbi-
nical views  about  commerce,  as  we  shall  immediately  show.
In  fact,  the  general  adoption  of  business,  which  has  so
often  been  made  the  subject  of  jeer  against  Israel,  marks
yet  another  social  state,  and  a  terrible  social  necessity.
When  Israel  was  scattered  by  units,  hundreds,  or  even
thousands,  but  still  a  miserable,  vanquished,  homeless,  weak
minority  among  the  nations  of  the  earth — avoided,  down-
trodden, and  at  the  mercy  of  popular  passion — no  other  course
was  open  to  them  than  to  follow  commerce.  Even  if
Jewish  talent  could  have  identified  itself  with  the  pursuits  of
the  Gentiles,  would  public  life  have  been  open  to  them — we
shall  not  say,  on  equal,  but,  on  any  terms  ?  Or,  to  descend  a
step  lower — except  in  those  crafts  which  might  be  peculiarly
theirs,  could  Jewish  tradesmen  have  competed  with  those
around  ?  would  they  even  have  been  allowed  to  enter  the
lists  ?  Moreover,  it  was  necessary  for  their  self-defence —
almost  for  their  existence — that  they  should  gain  influence.
And  in  their  circumstances  this  could  only  be  obtained  by
the  possession  of  wealth,  and  the  sole  road  to  this  was
commerce.

There  can  be  no  question  that,  according  to  the  Divine
purpose,  Israel  was  not  intended  to  be  a  commercial  people.
The  many  restrictions  to  the  intercourse  between  Jews  and
Gentiles,  which  the  Mosaic  law  everywhere  presents,  would
alone  have  sufficed  to  prevent  it.  Then  there  was  the  express
enactment  against  taking  interest  upon  loans  (Lev.  xxv.  36,
37),  which  must  have  rendered  commercial  transactions  irr-


2O2  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

possible,  even  though  it  was  relaxed  in  reference  to  those  who
lived  outside  the  boundaries  of  Palestine  (Deut.  xxiii.  20).
Again,  the  law  of  the  Sabbatic  and  of  the  Jubilee  year  would
have  brought  all  extended  commerce  to  a  standstill.  Nor
was  the  land  at  all  suited  for  the  requirements  of  trade.  True,
it  possessed  ample  seaboard,  whatever  the  natural  capabilities
of  its  harbours  may  have  been.  But  the  whole  of  that  coast,
with  the  harbours  of  Joppa,  Jamneh,  Ascalon,  Gaza,  and
Acco  or  Ptolemais,  remained,  with-  short  intervals,  in  the
possession  of  the  Philistines  and  Phoenicians.  Even  when
Herod  the  Great  built  the  noble  harbour  of  Caesarea,  it  was
almost  exclusively  used  by  foreigners  (Jos.  Jew.  Wars,  iii.  9,  i).
And  the  whole  history  of  Israel  in  Palestine  points  to  the
same  inference.  Only  on  one  occasion,  during  the  reign  of
Solomon,  do  we  find  anything  like  attempts  to  engage  in  mer-
cantile pursuits  on  a  large  scale.  The  reference  to  the  "  king's
merchants"  (i  Kings x.  28,  29;  2  Chron.  i.  16),  who  imported
horses  and  linen  yarn,  has  been  regarded  as  indicating  the
existence  of  a  sort  of  royal  trading  company,  or  of  a  royal
monopoly.  A  still  more  curious  inference  would  almost  lead
us  to  describe  Solomon  as  the  first  great  "  Protectionist."  The
expressions  in  I  Kings  x.  15  point  to  duties  paid  by  retail  and
wholesale  importers,  the  words,  literally  rendered,  indicating  as
a  source  of  revenue  that "  from  the  traders  and  from  the  traffick
of  the  merchants  ;"  both  words  in  their  derivation  pointing  to
foreign  trade,  and  probably  distinguishing  them  as  retail  and
wholesale.1  We  may  here  remark  that,  besides  these  duties
and  the  tributes  from  "protected"  kings  (i  Kings  ix.  15),
Solomon's  income  is  described  (i  Kings  x.  14)  as  having

1  See  Leyrer  in  Herzog,  foal  Encyd.  v.  p.  509  ;  and  Keil's  Comment,  on  the
passage.


Commerce.  203

amounted,  at  any  rate,  in  one  year,1  to  the  enormous  sum  of
between  two  and  three  millions  sterling  !  Part  of  this  may
have  been  derived  from  the  king's  foreign  trade.  For  we
know  (i  Kings  ix.  26,  etc. ;  2  Chron.  viii.  17,  etc.)  that  King
Solomon  built  a  navy  at  Ezion-geber,  on  the  Red  Sea,  which
port  David  had  taken.  This  navy  traded  to  Ophir,  in  com-
pany with  the  Phoenicians.  But  as  this  tendency  of  King
Solomon's  policy  was  in  opposition  to  the  Divine  purpose,  so
it  was  not  lasting.  The  later  attempt  of  King  Jehoshaphat  to
revive  the  foreign  trade  signally  failed  ;  "  for  the  ships  were
broken  at  Ezion-geber"  (i  Kings  xxii.  48  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  36,
37),  and  soon  afterwards  the  port  of  Ezion-geber  passed  once
more  into  the  hands  of  Edom  (2  Kings  viii.  20).

With  this  closes  the  Biblical  history  of  Jewish  commerce  in
Palestine,  in  the  strict  sense  of  that  term.  But  our  reference
to  what  may  be  called  the  Scriptural  indications  against  the
pursuit  of  commerce  brings  up  a  kindred  subject,  for  which,
although  confessedly  a  digression,  we  claim  a  hearing,  on
account  of  its  great  importance.  Those  most  superficially
acquainted  with  modern  theological  controversy  are  aware,
that  certain  opponents  of  the  Bible  have  specially  directed
their  attacks  against  the  antiquity  of  the  Pentateuch,  although
they  have  not  yet  arranged  among  themselves  what  parts  of
the  Pentateuch  were  written  by  different  authors,  nor  by  how
many,  nor  by  whom,  nor  at  what  times,  nor  when  or  by  whom
they  were  ultimately  collected  into  one  book.  Now  what
we  contend  for  in  this  connection  is,  that  the  legislation  of
the  Pentateuch  affords  evidence  of  its  composition  before
the  people  were  settled  in  Palestine.  We  arrive  at  this
conclusion  in  the  following  manner.  Supposing  a  code  of

1  The  Vulgate  renders,  "  Every  year."


2O4  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

laws  and  institutions  to  be  drawn  up  by  a  practical  legislator
—for  unquestionably  they  were  in  force  in  Israel — we  main-
tain, that  no  human  lawgiver  could  have  ordered  matters  for  a
nation  in  a  settled  state  as  we  find  it  done  in  the  Pentateuch.
The  world  has  had  many  speculative  constitutions  of  society
drawn  up  by  philosophers  aad  theorists,  from  Plato  to  Rous-
seau and  Owen.  None  of  these  would  have  suited,  or  even
been  possible  in  a  settled  state  of  society.  But  no  philosopher
would  ever  have  imagined  or  thought  of  such  laws  as  some
of  the  provisions  in  the  Pentateuch.  To  select  only  a  few,
almost  at  random.  Let  the  reader  think  of  applying,  for
example,  to  England,  such  provisions  as  that  all  males  were
to  appear  three  times  a  year  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  would
choose,  or  those  connected  with  the  Sabbatic  and  the  Jubilee
years,  or  those  regulating  religious  and  charitable  contribu-
tions, or  those  concerning  the  corners  of  fields,  or  those
prohibiting  the  taking  of  interest,  or  those  connected  with
the  Levitical  cities.  Then  let  any  one  seriously  ask  himself,
whether  such  institutions  could  have  been  for  the  first  time
propounded  or  introduced  by  a  legislator  at  the  time  of  David,
or  of  Hezekiah,  or  of  Ezra  ?  The  more  we  think  of  the  spirit
and  of  the  details  of  the  Mosaic  legislation,  the  stronger  grows
our  conviction,  that  such  laws  and  institutions  could  have  been
only  introduced  before  the  people  actually  settled  in  the  land.
So  far  as  we  are  aware,  this  line  of  argument  has  not  before
been  proposed  ;  and  yet  it  seems  necessary  for  our  opponents
to  meet  this  preliminary  and,  as  we  think,  insuperable  diffi-
culty of  their  theory,  before  we  can  be  asked  to  discuss  their
critical  objections.

But  to  return.     Passing  from  Biblical,  or,  at  least,  from  Old
Testament  to  later  times,  we  find  the  old  popular  feeling  in


Commerce.  205

Palestine  on  the  subject  of  commerce  still  existing.  For  once
Josephus  here  correctly  expresses  the  views  of  his  countrymen.
"  As  for  ourselves,"  he  writes  (Ag.  Apion,  i.  1 2),  "  we  neither
inhabit  a  maritime  country,  nor  do  we  delight  in  merchandise,
nor  in  such  a  mixture  with  other  men  as  arises  from  it ;  but
the  cities  we  dwell  in  are  remote  from  the  sea,  and  having  a
fruitful  country  for  our  habitation,  we  take  pains  in  cultivating
that  only."  Nor  were  the  opinions  of  the  Rabbis  different.
We  know  in  what  low  esteem  pedlars  were  held  by  the  Jewish
authorities.  But  even  commerce  was  not  much  more  highly
regarded.  It  has  been  rightly  said  that,  "  in  the  sixty-three
tractates  of  which  the  Talmud  is  composed,  scarcely  a  word
occurs  in  honour  of  commerce,  but  much  to  point  out  the
dangers  attendant  upon  money-making."  "Wisdom,"  says
Rabbi  Jochanan,  in  explanation  of  Deut.  xxx.  12,  "'  is  not  in
heaven  ' — that  is,  it  is  not  found  with  those  who  are  proud  ;
neither  is  it  '  beyond  the  sea ' — that  is,  it  will  not  be  found
among  traders  nor  among  merchants  "  (Er.  5  5  a).  Still  more
to  the  point  are  the  provisions  of  the  Jewish  law  as  to  those
who  lent  money  on  interest,  or  took  usury.  "  The  following,"
we  read  in  Rosh  Hash.  i.  8,  "  are  unfit  for  witness-bearing :
he  who  plays  with  dice  (a  gambler)  ;  he  who  lends  on
usury ;  they  who  train  doves  (either  for  betting  purposes,  or
as  decoys) ;  they  who  trade  in  seventh  year's  products,  and
slaves."  Even  more  pungent  is  this,  almost  reminding  one
of  the  Rabbinic  gloss :  "  Of  the  calumniator  God  says,
1  There  is  not  room  in  the  world  for  him  and  Me ' " — "  The
usurer  bites  off  a  piece  from  a  man,  for  he  takes  from  him
that  which  he  has  not  given  him  "  (Bab.  Mez.  60  b).  A  few
other  kindred  sayings  may  here  find  a  place.  "  Rabbi  Meir
saith :  Be  sparing  (doing  little)  in  business,  but  busy  in  the


po6  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Thorah"  (Ab.~tfT2).  Among  the  forty-eight  qualifications  foi
acquiring  the  Thorah,  "  little  business "  is  mentioned  (vi.  6).
Lastly,  we  have  this  from  Hillel,  concluding  with  a  very  noble
saying,  worthy  to  be  preserved  to  all  times  and  in  all  lan-
guages :  "  He  who  engages  much  in  business  cannot  become
a  sage ;  and  in  a  place  where  there  are  no  men,  strive  thou
to  be  a  man."

It  will  perhaps  have  been  observed,  that,  with  the  changing
circumstances  of  the  people,  the  views  as  to  commerce  also
underwent  a  slow  process  of  modification,  the  main  object  now
being  to  restrict  such  occupations,  and  especially  to  regulate
them  in  accordance  with  religion.  Inspectorships  of  weights
and  measures  are  of  comparatively  late  date  in  our  own  country.
The  Rabbis  in  this,  as  in  so  many  other  matters,  were
long  before  us.  They  appointed  regular  inspectors,  whose
duty  it  was  to  go  from  market  to  market,  and,  more  than
that,  to  fix  the  current  market  prices  (Baba  B.  88).  The
prices  for  produce  were  ultimately  determined  by  each  com-
munity. Few  merchants  would  submit  to  interference  with
what  is  called  the  law  of  supply  and  demand.  But  the
Talmudical  laws  against  buying  up  grain  and  withdrawing
it  from  sale,  especially  at  a  time  of  scarcity,  are  exceedingly
strict.  Similarly,  it  was  prohibited  artificially  to  raise  prices,
especially  of  produce.  Indeed,  it  was  regarded  as  cheating
to  charge  a  higher  profit  than  sixteen  per  cent.  In  general,
some  would  have  it  that  in  Palestine  no  one  should  make
profit  out  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  Cheating  was  declared
to  involve  heavier  punishment  than  a  breach  of  some  of  the
other  moral  commandments.  For  the  latter,  it  was  argued,
might  be  set  right  by  repentance.  But  he  who  cheated  took
in  not  merely  one  or  several  persons,  but  every  one  ;  and  how


Commi  rce.  207

could  that  ever  be  set  right  ?  And  all  were  admonished  to
remember,  that  "  God  punisheth  even  where  the  eye  of  an
earthly  judge  cannot  penetrate."1

We  have  spoken  of  a  gradual  modification  of  Rabbinical
views  with  the  changing  circumstances  of  the  nation.  This
probably  comes  out  most  clearly  in  the  advice  of  the  Tal-
mud (Baba  M.  42),  to  divide  one's  money  into  three  parts
— to  lay  out  one  in  the  purchase  of  land,  to  invest  the
second  in  merchandise,  and  to  keep  the  third  in  hand  as
cash.  But  there  was  always  this  comfort,  which  Rab  enu-
merated among  the  blessings  of  the  next  world,  that  there
was  no  commerce  there  (Ber.  17  a).  And  so  far  as  this
world  was  concerned,  the  advice  was  to  engage  in  business,
in  order  with  the  profit  made  to  assist  the  sages  in  their
pursuits,  just  as  Sebua,  one  of  the  three  wealthy  men  of  Jeru-
salem, had  assisted  the  great  Hillel.  From  what  has  been
said,  it  will  be  inferred  that  the  views  expressed  as  to
Palestinian,  or  even  Babylonian  Jews,  did  not  apply  to
those  who  were  "  dispersed  abroad "  among  the  various
Gentile  nations.  To  them,  as  already  shown,  commerce
would  be  a  necessity,  and,  in  fact,  the  grand  staple  of  their
existence.  If  this  may  be  said  of  all  Jews  of  the  dispersion,
it  applies  specially  to  that  community  which  was  the  richest
and  most  influential  among  them — we  mean  the  Jews  of
Alexandria.

Few  phases,  even  in  the  ever-changeful  history  of  the
Jewish  people,  are  more  strange,  more  varied  in  interest,  or
more  pathetic  than  those  connected  with  the  Jews  of  Alex-
andria. The  immigration  of  Jews  into  Egypt  commenced
even  before  the  Babylonish  captivity.  Naturally  it  received

1  Compare  Hamburger,  Real-EncycL  p.  494.


2o8  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

great  increase  from  that  event,  and  afterwards  from  the  murder
of  Gedaliah.  But  the  real  exodus  commenced  under  Alexander
the  Great  That  monarch  accorded  to  the  Jews  in  Alex-
andria the  same  rights  as  its  Greek  inhabitants  enjoyed,  and
so  raised  them  to  the  rank  of  the  privileged  classes.  Hence-
forth their  numbers  and  their  influence  grew  under  successive
rulers.  We  find  them  commanding  Egyptian  armies,  largely
influencing  Egyptian  thought  and  inquiry,  and  partially
leavening  it  by  the  translation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  into
Greek.  Of  the  so-called  Temple  of  Onias  at  Leontopolis,
which  rivalled  that  of  Jerusalem,  and  of  the  magnificence
of  the  great  synagogue  at  Alexandria,  we  cannot  speak  in
this  place.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  in  the  Providence
of  God,  the  location  of  so  many  Jews  in  Alexandria,  and
the  mental  influence  which  they  acquired,  were  designed  to
have  an  important  bearing  on  the  later  spread  of  the  Gospel
of  Christ  among  the  Greek-speaking  and  Grecian-thinking
educated  world.  In  this,  the  Greek  translation  of  the  Old  Tes-
tament was  also  largely  helpful.  Indeed,  humanly  speaking,
it  would  have  scarcely  been  possible  without  it.  At  the  time
of  Philo  the  number  of  Jews  in  Egypt  amounted  to  no  less
than  one  million.  In  Alexandria  they  occupied  two  out  of  the
five  quarters  of  the  town,  which  were  called  after  the  first
five  letters  of  the  alphabet.  They  lived  under  rulers  of  their
own,  almost  in  a  state  of  complete  independence.  Theirs
was  the  quarter  Delta,  along  the  seashore.  The  supervision
of  navigation,  both  by  sea  and  river,  was  wholly  entrusted
to  them.  In  fact,  the  large  export  trade,  especially  in
grain — and  Egypt  was  the  granary  of  the  world — was  entirely
in  their  hands.  The  provisioning  of  Italy  and  of  the  world
was  the  business  of  the  Jews.  It  is  a  curious  circumstance,


Commerce.  2og

as  illustrating  how  little  the  history  of  the  world  changes,
that  during  the  troubles  at  Rome  the  Jewish  bankers  of
Alexandria  were  able  to  obtain  from  their  correspondents
earlier  and  more  trustworthy  political  tidings  than  any  one
else.1  This  enabled  them  to  declare  themselves  in  turn  for
Caesar  and  for  Octavius,  and  to  secure  the  full  political  and
financial  results  flowing  from  such  policy,  just  as  the  great
Jewish  banking  houses  at  the  beginning  of  this  century  were
similarly  able  to  profit  by  earlier  and  more  trustworthy  news
of  events  than  the  general  public  could  obtain.

But  no  sketch  of  commerce  among  the  early  Jews,  however
brief,  would  be  complete  without  some  further  notice  both  of
the  nature  of  the  trade  carried  on,  and  of  the  legal  regulations
which  guarded  it.  The  business  of  the  travelling  hawker,
of  course,  was  restricted  to  negotiating  an  exchange  of  the
products  of  one  district  for  those  of  another,  to  buying  and
selling  articles  of  home  produce,  or  introducing  among  those
who  affected  fashion  or  luxury  in  country  districts  specimens
of  the  latest  novelties  from  abroad.  The  foreign  imports
were,  with  the  exception  of  wood  and  metals,  chiefly  articles
of  luxury.  Fish  from  Spain,  apples  from  Crete,  cheese  from
Bithynia  ;  lentils,  beans,  and  gourds  from  Egypt  and  Greece  ;
plates  from  Babylon,  wine  from  Italy,  beer  from  Media,
household  vessels  from  Sidon,  baskets  from  Egypt,  dresses
from  India,  sandals  from  Laodicea,  shirts  from  Cilicia,  veils
irom  Arabia — such  were  some  of  the  goods  imported.  On
the  other  hand,  the  exports  from  Palestine  consisted  of  such
produce  as  wheat,  oil,  balsam,  honey,  figs,  etc.,  the  value  of
exports  and  imports  being  nearly  equal,  and  the  balance,  if
any,  in  favour  of  Palestine.

1  Hausrath,  Neutest.  Zeitg.  vol.  L  p.  57.


2io  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Then,  as  to  the  laws  regulating  trade  and  commerce,  they
were  so  minute  as  almost  to  remind  us  of  the  Saviour's  stric-
tures on  Pharisaic  punctiliousness.     Several  Mishnic  tractates
are  full  of  determinations  on  these  points.     "  The  dust  of  the
balances  "  is  a  strictly  Jewish  idea  and  phrase.    So  far  did  the
law  interfere,  as  to  order  that  a  wholesale  dealer  must  cleanse
the  measures  he  used  once  every  month,  and  a  retail  dealer
twice  a  week  ;  that  all  weights  were  to  be  washed  once  a  week,
and  the  balances  wiped  every  time  they  had  been  used.     By
way  of  making  assurance  doubly  sure,  the  seller  had  to  give
rather  more  than  an  ounce  in  addition  to  every  ten  pounds,  if
the  article  consisted  of  fluids,  or  half  that  if  of  solids  (Baba  B.
v.  IO,  1 1).     Here  are  some  of  the  principal  ordinances  relating
to  trade.1     A  bargain  was  not  considered  closed  until  both
parties  had  taken  possession  of  their  respective  properties.
But   after   one   of  them   had   received   the   money,  it   was
deemed  dishonourable  and  sinful  for  the  other  to  draw  back
In  case  of  overcharge,  or  a  larger  than  the  lawful  profit,  a
purchaser  had  the  right  of  returning  the  article,  or  claiming
the  balance  in    money,  provided  he   applied  for   it  after  an
interval  not  longer  than  was  needful  for  showing  the  goods  to
another  merchant  or  to  a  relative.     Similarly,  the  seller  was
also  protected.      Money-changers  were  allowed  to  charge  a
fixed  discount  for  light  money,  or  to  return  it  within  a  certain
period,  if  below  the  weight  at  which  they  had  taken  it.     A
merchant  might   not  be  pressed  to  name  the   lowest  price,
unless  the   questioner  seriously  intended   to   purchase ;  nor
might  he  be  even  reminded  of  a  former  overcharge  to  induce
him  to  lower  his  prices.     Goods  of  different  qualities  might
not  be  mixed,  even  though  the  articles  added  were  of  superior

1  See  my  History  of  the  Jewish  Nation^  p.  305,  etc.


Commerce.  211

value.  For  the  protection  of  the  public,  agriculturists  were
forbidden  to  sell  in  Palestine  wine  diluted  with  water,  unless
in  places  where  such  was  the  known  usage.  Indeed,  one  of
the  Rabbis  went  so  far  as  to  blame  merchants  who  gave  little
presents  to  children  by  way  of  attracting  the  custom  of  their
parents.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  they  would  have  said  to
the  modern  practice  of  giving  discount  to  servants.  All  agreed
in  reprobating  as  deceit  every  attempt  to  give  a  better  appear-
ance to  an  article  exposed  for  sale.  Purchases  of  corn  could
not  be  concluded  till  the  general  market-price  had  been  fixed

But  beyond  all  this,  every  kind  of  speculation  was  regarded
as  akin  to  usury.  With  the  delicacy  characteristic  of  Rabbinical
law,  creditors  were  expressly  prohibited  from  using  anything
belonging  to  a  debtor  without  paying  for  it,  from  sending  hirr
on  an  errand,  or  even  accepting  a  present  from  one  who  had
solicited  an  advance.  So  punctilious  were  the  Rabbis  ir
avoiding  the  appearance  of  usury,  that  a  woman  who  borrowed
a  loaf  from  her  neighbour  was  told  to  fix  its  value  at  the  time
lest  a  sudden  rise  in  flour  should  make  the  loaf  returned
worth  more  than  that  borrowed  !  If  a  house  or  a  field  were
rented,  a  somewhat  higher  charge  might  be  made,  if  the
money  were  not  paid  in  advance,  but  not  in  the  case  of  a  pur-
chase. It  was  regarded  as  an  improper  kind  of  speculation
to  promise  a  merchant  one-half  of  the  profit  on  the  sales  he
effected,  or  to  advance  him  money  and  then  allow  him  one-
half  of  the  profits  on  his  transactions.  In  either  case,  it  was
thought,  a  merchant  would  be  exposed  to  more  temptation.
By  law  he  was  only  entitled  to  a  commission  and  to  compen-
sation for  his  time  and  trouble.

Equally  strict  were  the  regulations  affecting  debtor  and
creditor.  Advances  were  legally  secured  by  regular  docu-


212  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

ments,  drawn  out  at  the  expense  of  the  debtor,  and  attested  by
witnesses,  about  whose  signature  minute  directions  are  given.
To  prevent  mistakes,  the  sum  lent  was  marked  at  the  top,
as  well  as  in  the  body  of  the  document.  A  person  was  not
taken  as  security  for  another  after  the  loan  was  actually  con-
tracted. In  reference  to  interest  (which  among  the  Romans
was  calculated  monthly),  in  regard  to  pledges,  and  in  dealing
with  insolvent  debtors,  the  mildness  of  the  Jewish  law  has
never  been  equalled.  It  was  lawful,  under  certain  restrictions,
to  take  a  pledge,  and  in  the  event  of  non-payment  to  sell
it ;  but  wearing  apparel,  bedding,  the  ploughshare,  and  all
articles  required  for  the  preparation  of  food  were  excepted.
Similarly,  it  was  unlawful,  under  any  circumstances,  to  take
a  pledge  from  a  widow,  or  to  sell  that  which  belonged  to  her.
These  are  only  some  of  the  provisions  by  which  the  interests
of  all  parties  were  not  only  guarded,  but  a  higher  religious
tone  sought  to  be  imparted  to  ordinary  life.  Those  who  are
acquainted  with  the  state  of  matters  among  the  nations
around,  and  the  cruel  exactions  of  the  Roman  law,  will  best
appreciate  the  difference  in  this  respect  also  between  Israel
and  the  Gentiles.  The  more  the  Rabbinical  code  is  studied,
the  higher  will  be  our  admiration  of  its  provisions,  character-
ised as  these  are  by  wisdom,  kindliness,  and  delicacy,  we
venture  to  say,  far  beyond  any  modern  legislation.  Not  only
the  history  of  the  past,  the  present  privileges,  and  the  hope
connected  with  the  promises,  but  the  family,  social,  and
public  life  which  he  found  among  his  brethren  would  attach
a  Jew  to  his  people.  Only  one  thing  was  awanting — but
that,  alas !  the  "  one  thing  needful."  For,  in  the  language
of  St.  Paul  (Rom.  x.  2),  "  I  bear  them  record  that  they  have
a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge."


CHAPTER    XIII.

AMONG  THE   PEOPLE,  AND  WITH   THE   PHARISEES.

T  T  would  have  been  difficult  to  proceed  far  either  in  Galilet
J-  or  in  Judaea  without  coming  into  contact  with  an  alto-
gether peculiar  and  striking  individuality,  differing  from  all
around,  and  which  would  at  once  arrest  attention.  This  was
the  Pharisee.  Courted  or  feared,  shunned  or  flattered,  reve-
rently looked  up  to  or  laughed  at,  he  was  equally  a  power
everywhere,  both  ecclesiastically  and  politically,  as  belonging
to  the  most  influential,  the  most  zealous,  and  the  most  closely -
connected  religious  fraternity,  which  in  the  pursuit  of  it£
objects  spared  neither  time  nor  trouble,  feared  no  danger,
and  shrunk  from  no  consequences.  Familiar  as  the  name
sounds  to  readers  of  the  New  Testament  and  students  of
Jewish  history,  there  is  no  subject  on  which  more  crude  or
inaccurate  notions  prevail  than  that  of  Pharisaism,  nor  yet
any  which,  rightly  understood,  gives  fuller  insight  into  the
state  of  Judaism  at  the  time  of  our  Lord,  or  better  illustrates
His  words  and  His  deeds.  Let  us  first  view  the  Pharisee  as,
himself  seemingly  unmoved,  he  moves  about  among  the
crowd,  which  either  respectfully  gives  way  or  curiously  looks
after  him.


214  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

There  was  probably  no  town  or  village  inhabited  by  Jews
which  had  not  its  Pharisees,  although  they  would,  of  course,
gather  in  preference  about  Jerusalem  with  its  Temple,  and
what,  perhaps,  would  have  been  even  dearer  to  the  heart  of  a
genuine  Pharisee — its  four  hundred  and  eighty  synagogues,  its
Sanhedrims  (great  and  small),  and  its  schools  of  study.  There
could  be  no  difficulty  in  recognising  such  an  one.  Walking
behind  him,  the  chances  were,  he  would  soon  halt  to  say  his
prescribed  prayers.  If  the  fixed  time  for  them  had  come,  he
would  stop  short  in  the  middle  of  the  road,  perhaps  say  one
section  of  them,  move  on,  again  say  another  part,  and  so  on,
till,  whatever  else  might  be  doubted,  there  could  be  no  ques-
tion of  the  conspicuousness  of  his  devotions  in  market-place
or  corners  of  streets.  There  he  would  stand,  as  taught  by  the
traditional  law,  would  draw  his  feet  well  together,  compose  his
body  and  clothes,  and  bend  so  low  "  that  every  vertebra  in  his
back  would  stand  out  separate,"  or,  at  least,  till  "  the  skin  over
his  heart  would  fall  into  folds  "  (Ber.  28  b}.  The  workman
would  drop  his  tools,  the  burden-bearer  his  load ;  if  a  man
had  already  one  foot  in  the  stirrup,  he  would  withdraw  it.  The
hour  had  come,  and  nothing  could  be  suffered  to  interrupt  or
disturb  him.  The  very  salutation  of  a  king,  it  was  said,  must
remain  unreturned  ;  nay,  the  twisting  of  a  serpent  around
one's  heel  must  remain  unheeded.  Nor  was  it  merely  the
prescribed  daily  seasons  of  prayer  which  so  claimed  his
devotions.  On  entering  a  village,  and  again  on  leaving  it,
he  must  say  one  or  two  benedictions  ;  the  same  in  passing
through  a  fortress,  in  encountering  any  danger,  in  meeting
with  anything  new,  strange,  beautiful,  or  unexpected.  And
the  longer  he  prayed  the  better.  In  the  view  of  the  Rabbis
this  had  a  twofold  advantage  ;  for  "  much  prayer  is  sure  to


Among  the  People,  and  with  the  Pharisees.    215

be  heard,"  and  "  prolix  prayer  prolongeth  life."  At  the  same
time,  as  each  prayer  expressed,  and  closed  with  a  benediction
of  the  Divine  Name,  there  would  be  special  religious  merit
attaching  to  mere  number,  and  a  hundred  "benedictions"
said  in  one  day  was  a  kind  of  measure  of  great  piety.

But  on  meeting  a  Pharisee  face  to  face  his  identity  could
still  less  be  doubted.  His  self-satisfied,  or  else  mock-modest
or  ostentatiously  meek  bearing  would  betray  him,  even  irre-
spective of  his  superciliousness  towards  others,  his  avoidance
of  every  touch  of  persons  or  things  which  he  held  unclean,
and  his  extravagant  religious  displays.  We  are,  of  course,
speaking  of  the  class,  or,  rather,  the  party,  as  such,  and
of  its  tendencies,  and  not  of  all  the  individuals  who  com-
posed it.  Besides,  there  were,  as  we  shall  by-and-by  see,
various  degrees  among  them,  from  the  humblest  Pharisee,  who
was  simply  a  member  of  the  fraternity,  only  initiated  in  its
lowest  degree,  or  perhaps  even  a  novice,  to  the  most  advanced
chasid)  or  "  pietist."  The  latter  would,  for  example,  bring
every  day  a  trespass-offering,  in  case  he  had  committed  some
offence  of  which  he  was  doubtfuLJ^Iow  far  the  punctilious-
ness of  that  class,  in  observing  the  laws  of  Levitical  purity,
would  go,  may  be  gathered  from  a  Rabbi,  who  would  not
allow  his  son  to  remain  in  the  room  while  he  was  in  the  hands
of  the  surgeon,  lest  he  might  be  defiled  by  contact  with  the
amputated  limb,  which,  of  course,  was  thenceforth  dead.
Another  chasid  went  so  far  in  his  zeal  for  Sabbath  observ-
ance, that  he  would  not  build  up  again  his  house  because  he
had  thought  about  it  on  the  Sabbath  ;  and  it  was  even
declared  by  some  improper  to  intrust  a  letter  to  a  Gentile,
lest  he  should  deliver  it  on  the  holy  day  !  These  are  real,
but  by  no  means  extreme  cases.  For,  a  Rabbi,  contemporary


216  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

with  the  apostles,  was  actually  obliged  to  denounce,  as  incom-
patible with  the  continuance  of  society,  the  vagaries  of  the
so-called  "  Chasid  Shoteh,"  or  silly  pietist.  What  was  meant
by  these  will  appear  from  such  instances  as  the  refusal  to
save  a  woman  from  drowning  for  fear  of  touching  a  female,
or  waiting  to  put  off  the  phylacteries  before  stretching  out  a
hand  to  rescue  a  child  from  the  water !

Readers  of  the  New  Testament  will  remember  that  the  very
dress  of  the  Pharisees  differed  from  that  of  others.  Simple  as
the  garb  of  Orientals  is,  it  must  not  be  thought  that,  in  those
days,  wealth,  rank,  and  luxury  were  not  recognisable  quite  as
much,  if  not  more,  than  among  ourselves.  No  doubt  the
polished  Grecian,  the  courtly  Herodian,  the  wealthy  Sadducee,
as  well  as  many  of  the  lady  patronesses  of  the  Pharisees
(Jos.  Ant.  xvii.  2,  4),  would  have  been  easily  recognised.  At
any  rate,  Jewish  writings  give  us  such  descriptions  of  their
toilette,  that  we  can  almost  transport  ourselves  among  the
fashionable  society  of  Tiberias,  Caesarea,  Jerusalem,  or  that
of  "the  dispersed,"  who  were  residents  of  Alexandria  or  of
the  wealthy  towns  of  Babylonia.

Altogether,  it  seems,  eighteen  garments  were  supposed  to
complete  an  elegant  toilette.  The  material,  the  colour,  and
the  cut  distinguished  the  wearer.  While  the  poor  used  the
upper  garment  for  a  covering  at  night,  the  fashionable  wore
the  finest  white,  embroidered,  or  even  purple  garments,  with
curiously-wrought  silk  girdles.  It  was  around  this  upper
garment  that  "  the  borders "  were  worn  which  the  Pharisees
"enlarged"  (Matt,  xxiii.  5).  Of  these  we  shall  speak  pre-
sently. Meantime  we  continue  our  description.  The  inner
garment  went  down  to  the  heels.  The  head-dress  consisted
of  a  pointed  cap,  or  kind  of  turban,  of  more  or  less  exquisite


Among  the  People,  and  with  the  Pharisees.     217

material,  and  curiously  wound,  the  ends  often  hanging  grace-
fully behind.  Gloves  were  generally  used  only  for  protection.
As  for  ladies,  besides  differences  in  dress,  the  early  charge  of
Isaiah  (iii.  16-24)  against  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  might
have  been  repeated  with  tenfold  emphasis  in  New  Testament
times.  We  read  of  three  kinds  of  veils.  The  Arabian  hung
down  from  the  head,  leaving  the  wearer  free  to  see  all
around  ;  the  veil-dress  was  a  kind  of  mantilla,  thrown  grace-
fully about  the  whole  person,  and  covering  the  head  ;  while
the  Egyptian  resembled  the  veil  of  modern  Orientals,  cover-
ing breast,  neck,  chin,  and  face,  and  leaving  only  the  eyes
free.  The  girdle,  which  was  fastened  lower  than  by  men,  was
often  of  very  costly  fabric,  and  studded  with  precious  stones.
Sandals  consisted  merely  of  soles  strapped  to  the  feet ;  but
ladies  wore  also  costly  slippers,  sometimes  embroidered,  or
adorned  with  gems,  and  so  arranged  that  the  pressure  of  the
foot  emitted  a  delicate  perfume.  It  is  well  known  that  scents
and  "  ointments "  were  greatly  in  vogue,  and  often  most
expensive  (Matt.  xxvi.  7).  The  latter  were  prepared  of  oil
and  of  home  or  foreign  perfumes,  the  dearest  being  kept  in
costly  alabaster  boxes.  The  trade  of  perfumer  was,  however,
looked  down  upon,  not  only  among  the  Jews,  but  even  among
heathen  nations.  But  in  general  society  anointing  was  com-
bined with  washing,  as  tending  to  comfort  and  refreshment.
The  hair,  the  beard,  the  forehead,  and  the  face,  even  garlands
worn  at  feasts,  were  anointed.  But  luxury  went  much
farther  than  all  this.  Some  ladies  used  cosmetics,  painting
their  cheeks  and  blackening  their  eyebrows  with  a  mixture
of  antimony,  zinc,  and  oil.  The  hair,  which  was  considered
a  chief  point  of  beauty,  was  the  object  of  special  care.
Young  people  wore  it  long  ;  but  in  men  this  would  have


218  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

been  regarded  as  a  token  of  effeminacy  (i  Cor.  xi.  14).  The
beard  was  carefully  trimmed,  anointed,  and  perfumed.  Slaves
were  not  allowed  to  wear  beards.  Peasant  girls  tied  their  hair
in  a  simple  knot ;  but  the  fashionable  Jewesses  curled  and
plaited  theirs,  adorning  the  tresses  with  gold  ornaments  and
pearls.  The  favourite  colour  was  a  kind  of  auburn,  to  pro-
duce which  the  hair  was  either  dyed  or  sprinkled  with  gold-
dust.  We  read  even  of  false  hair  (Shab.  vi.  3),  just  as  false
teeth  also  were  worn  in  Judaea.  Indeed,  as  in  this  respect
also  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun,  we  are  not  asto-
nished to  find  mention  of  hair-pins  and  elegant  combs,  nor
to  read  that  some  Jewish  dandies  had  their  hair  regularly
dressed  !  However,  the  business  of  hairdresser  was  not  re-
garded as  very  respectable,  any  more  than  that  of  perfumer.1
As  for  ornaments,  gentlemen  generally  wore  a  seal,  either  on
the  ring-finger  or  suspended  round  the  neck.  Some  of  them
had  also  bracelets  above  the  wrist  (commonly  of  the  right
arm),  made  of  ivory,  gold,  or  precious  stones  strung  together.
Of  course,  the  fashionable  lady  was  similarly  adorned,
adding  to  the  bracelets  finger-rings,  ankle-rings,  nose-rings,
ear-rings,  gorgeous  head-dresses,  necklaces,  chains,  and  what
are  nowadays  called  "  charms."  As  it  may  interest  some,  we
shall  add  a  few  sentences  of  description.  The  earring  was
either  plain,  or  had  a  drop,  a  pendant,  or  a  little  bell  inserted.
The  nose-ring,  which  the  traditional  law  ordered  to  be  put
aside  on  the  Sabbath,  hung  gracefully  over  the  upper  lip,  yet

1  The  learned  Lightfoot  (Hor<z  Hebr.  pp.  498  and  1081)  has  expressed  a  doubt
whether  the  name  "Magdalene"  is  to  be  rendered  "  from  Magdala  "  or  "the
hairdresser."  We  have  noted  in  a  previous  chapter,  that  the  inhabitants  of
Magdala  engaged  in  such  and  similar  business.  But  the  Rabbinical  passages  to
which  Lightfoot  refers  are  not  satisfactory,  since  they  are  evidently  dictated  by  a
special  animus  against  Christ  and  Christianity.


Among  the  People,  and  with  the  Pharisees.     219

so  as  not  to  interfere  with  the  salute  of  the  privileged  friend
Two  kinds  of  necklaces  were  worn — one  close-fitting,  the  other
often  consisting  of  precious  stones  or  pearls,  and  hanging  down
over  the  chest,  often  as  low  as  the  girdle.  The  fashionable
lady  would  wear  two  or  three  such  chains,,  to  which  smelling-
bottles  and  various  ornaments,  even  heathen  "  charms,"  were
attached.  Gold  pendants  descended  from  the  head-orna-
ment, which  sometimes  rose  iike  a  tower,  or  was  wreathed
in  graceful  snake-like  coils.  The  anklets  were  generally  so
wrought  as  in  walking  to  make  a  sound  like  little  bells.
Sometimes  the  two  ankle-rings  were  fastened  together,  which
would  oblige  the  fair  wearer  to  walk  with  small,  mincing
steps.  If  to  all  this  we  add  gold  and  diamond  pins,  and  say
that  our  very  brief  description  is  strictly  based  upon  con-
temporary notices,  the  reader  will  have  some  idea  of  the
appearance  of  fashionable  society.1

|  The  sketch  just  given  will  be  of  some  practical  use  if  it
helps  us  more  fully  to  realise  the  contrast  presented  by  the
appearance  of  the  Pharisee.  Whether  sternly  severe,  blandly
meek,  or  zealously  earnest,  he  would  carefully  avoid  all  con-
tact with  one  who  was  not  of  the  fraternity,  or  even  occupied
an  inferior  degree  in  it,  as  we  shall  by-and-by  show.  He
would  also  be  recognisable  by  his  very  garb.  For,  in  the  lan-
guage of  our  Lord,  the  Pharisees  made  "  broad  their  phylac-
teries," and  "  enlarged  the  borders  of  their  garments."  The
latter  observance,  at  least  so  far  as  concerned  the  wearing  of
memorial  fringes  on  the  borders  of  the  garments — not  the
conspicuous  enlargement  of  these  borders — rested  really  on  a
Divine  ordinance  (Num.  xv.  37  ;  Deut.  xxii.  12).  In  Scripture
these  fringes  are  prescribed  to  be  of  blue,  the  symbolical  colout

'  Compare  my  History  tS'he  Jewish  Nation,  pp.  315-318.


220  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

of  the  covenant ;  but  the  Mishnah  allows  them  also  to  be
white  (Men.  iv.  i).  They  are  not  unfrequently  referred  to  in
the  New  Testament  (Matt.  ix.  20  ;  xiv.  36  ;  xxiii.  5  ;  Mark
vi.  56  ;  Luke  viii.  44).  A*  already  stated,  they  were  worn  on
the  border  of  the  outer  garment — no  doubt  by  every  pious
Israelite.  Later  Jewish  mysticism  found  in  this  fringed
border  deep  references  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Shechinah
enwrapped  itself  in  creation,  and  called  the  attention  of  each
Israelite  to  the  fact  that,  if  in  Num.  xv.  39  we  read  (in  the
Hebrew),  "  Ye  shall  look  upon  him "  [not  "  it,"  as  in  our
Authorised  Version]  "  and  remember,"  this  change  of  gender
(for  the  Hebrew  word  for  "  fringes  "  is  feminine)  indicated —
"  that,  if  thou  doest  so,  it  is  as  much  as  if  thou  sawest  the
throne  of  the  Glory,  which  is  like  unto  blue."  And  thus
believing,  the  pious  Jew  would  cover  in  prayer  his  head  with
this  mysterious  fringed  garment ;  in  marked  contrast  to  which
St.  Paul  declares  all  such  superstitious  practices  as  dishonour-
ing (i  Cor.  xi.  4).1

If  the  practice  of  wearing  borders  with  fringes  had  Scrip-
tural authority,  we  are  well  convinced  that  no  such  plea  could
be  urged  for  the  so-called  "  phylacteries."  The  observance
arose  from  a  literal  interpretation  of  Exod.  xiii.  9,  to  which
even  the  later  injunction  in  Deut.  vi.  8  gives  no  countenance.
This  appears  even  from  its  repetition  in  Deut  xi.  18,  where
the  spiritual  meaning  and  purport  of  the  direction  is  im-
mediately indicated,  and  from  a  comparison  with  kindred

1  The  practice  of  modern  Jews  is  somewhat  different  from  that  of  ancient
times.  Without  entering  into  details,  it  is  sufficient  here  to  say  that  they  wear
underneath  their  garments  a  small  square,  with  fringes,  called  the  little  tallith
(from  "talal,"  to  overshadow  or  cover),  or  the  "arbah  canphoth "  (four
"  corners ") ;  while  during  prayer  they  wrap  themselves  in  the  great  tallith,
or  so-called  prayer-cloak.


Among  the  People,  and  with  the  Pharisees.    221

expressions,  which  evidently  could  not  be  taken  literally — such
as  Prov.  iii.  3  ;  vi.  21;  vii.  3 ;  Cant.  viii.  6  ;  Isa.  xlix.  16.  The  very
term  used  by  the  Rabbis  for  phylacteries — "  tephillin,"  prayer-
fillets — is  of  comparatively  modern  origin,  in  so  far  as  it  does
not  occur  in  the  Hebrew  Old  Testament.  The  Samaritans
did  not  acknowledge  them  as  of  Mosaic  obligation,  any  more
than  do  the  Karaite  Jews,  and  there  is,  what  seems  to  us,  suf-
ficient evidence,  even  from  Rabbinical  writings,  that  in  the
time  of  Christ  phylacteries  were  not  universally  worn,  nor
yet  by  the  priests  while  officiating  in  the  Temple.  Although
the  words  of  our  Lord  seem  only  expressly  to  condemn  the
making  broad  of  the  phylacteries,  for  purposes  of  religious
ostentation,  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  He  Himself  had
worn  them.  At  any  rate,  while  any  ordinary  Israelite  would
only  put  them  on  at  prayer  or  on  solemn  occasions,  the
members  of  the  Pharisaic  confraternity  wore  them  all  day
long.  The  practice  itself,  and  the  views  and  ordinances  con-
nected with  it,  are  so  characteristic  of  the  party,  that  we  shall
add  a  few  further  particulars.

The  "  tephillin "  were  worn  on  the  left  arm,  towards  the
heart,  and  on  the  forehead.  They  consisted — to  describe  them
roughly — of  capsules,  containing,  on  parchment  (that  for  the
forehead  on  four  distinct  parchments),  these  four  passages
of  Scripture:  Exod.  xiii.  i-io ;  xiii.  11-16;  Deut.  vi.  4-9;
and  xi.  13-21.  The  capsules  were  fastened  on  by  black
leather  straps,  which  were  wound  round  the  arm  and  hand
(seven  times  round  the  former,  and  three  times  round  the
latter),  or  else  fitted  to  the  forehead  in  a  prescribed  and
mystically  significant  manner.  The  wearer  of  them  could  not
be  mistaken.  But  as  for  their  value  and  importance  in  the
eyes  of  the  Rabbis,  it  were  impossible  to  exaggerate  it.


222  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

They  were  reverenced  as  highly  as  the  Scriptures,  and,  like
them,  might  be  rescued  from  the  flames  on  a  Sabbath,  although
not  worn,  as  constituting  "a  burden  !"  It  was  said  that  Moses
had  received  the  law  of  their  observance  from  God  on  Mount
Sinai ;  that  the  "  tephillin  "  were  more  sacred  than  the  golden
plate  on  the  forehead  of  the  high-priest,  since  its  inscription
embodied  only  once  the  sacred  name  of  Jehovah,  while  the
writing  inside  the  "  tephillin "  contained  it  not  less  than
twenty-three  times ;  that  the  command  of  wearing  them
equalled  all  other  commands  put  together,  with  many  other
similar  extravagances.1  How  far  the  profanity  of  the  Rabbis
in  this  respect  would  go,  appears  from  the  circumstance,  that
they  supposed  God  Himself  as  wearing  phylacteries  (Ber.
6  a).  The  fact  is  deduced  from  Isa.  Ixii.  8,  where  the  "right
hand  "  by  which  Jehovah  swears  is  supposed  to  refer  to  the
law,  according  to  the  last  clause  of  Deut.  xxxiii.  2  ;  while  the
expression  "  strength  of  His  arm  "  was  applied  to  the  "tephil-
lin," since  the  term  "  strength  "  appeared  in  Ps.  xxix.  1 1  in
connection  with  God's  people,  and  was  in  turn  explained  by  a
reference  to  Deut.  xxviii.  10.  For  "the  strength"  of  God's
people  (Ps.  xxix.  n)  is  that  which  would  cause  all  to  "be
afraid  "  of  Israel  (Deut.  xxviii.  10) ;  and  this  latter  would  be
due  to  their  seeing  that  Israel  was  "  called  by  the  name  of
Jehovah,"  this  ocular  demonstration  being  afforded  through
the  "  tephillin."  Such  was  the  evidence  which  traditionalism
offered  for  such  a  monstrous  proposition.

1  We  can  recommend  nothing  better,  to  those  who  have  heard  that  the  teaching
of  the  New  Testament  has  been  derived  from  that  of  the  Rabbis,  than  to  collate
the  revolting  details  on  this  subject,  as  well  as  those  connected  with  prayer,  in  Ber.
23  a  to  25  b ;  or  else  to  study  their  interpretations  of  dreams,  or  such  details  as
Ber.  62  a,  b.  To  those  who  have  been  told  that  Hillel  might  be  compared  with
Jesus,  we  recommend  the  perusal  of  what  at  times  engaged  that  great  Jewish
Rabbi's  teaching  ;  for  example,  in  Ber.  23  a.


Among  the  People,  and  with  the  Pharisees.     223

The  above  may  serve  as  a  specimen  alike  of  Rabbinical
exegesis  and  theological  inferences.  It  will  also  help  us  to
understand,  how  in  such  a  system  inconvenient  objections,
arising  from  the  plain  meaning  of  Scripture,  would  be  sum-
marily set  aside  by  exalting  the  interpretations  of  men  above
the  teaching  of  the  Bible.  This  brings  us  straight  to  the
charge  of  our  Lord  against  the  Pharisees  (Mark  vii.  13),  that
they  made  "  the  Word  of  God  of  none  effect "  through  their
"  traditions."  The  fact,  terrible  as  it  is,  nowhere,  perhaps,
comes  out  more  strongly  than  in  connection  with  these
very  "  tephillin."  We  read  in  the  Mishnah  (Sank.  xi.  3),
literally,  as  follows  :  "  It  is  more  punishable  to  act  against  the
words  of  the  Scribes  than  against  those  of  Scripture.  If  a
man  were  tc  say,  '  There  is  no  such  thing  as  "  tephillin,"  '  in
order  thereby  to  act  contrary  to  the  words  of  Scripture,  he  is
not  to  be  treated  as  a  rebel.  But  if  he  should  say,  '  There
are  five  divisions  in  the  prayer-fillets  '  (instead  of  four  in  those
for  the  forehead,  as  the  Rabbis  taught),  in  order  to  add  to  the
words  of  the  Scribes,  he  is  guilty."  Assuredly,  a  more  signal
instance  could  scarcely  be  found  of  "  teaching  for  doctrines
the  commandments  of  men,"  and  of,  even  on  their  own  show-
ing, "  laying  aside  the  commandment  of  God,"  in  order  to
"hold  the  tradition  of  men"  (Mark  vii.  7,  8).
^  Before  passing  from  this  subject,  it  may  be  convenient  to
explain  the  meaning  of  the  Greek  term  "  phylacteries  "  for
these  "tephillin,"  and  to  illustrate  its  aptness.  It  is  now
almost  generally  admitted,  that  the  real  jneaning  of  phylac-
teries is  equivalent  to  amulets,  or  charmsTy  And  as  such  the
Rabbinists  really  regarded  and  treated  them,  however  much
they  might  otherwise  have  disclaimed  all  connection  with
heathen  views.  In  this  connection  we  are  not  going  to  enter


224  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life,

into  the  unsavoury  subject  of  their  heathen  superstitions,  such
as  where  to  find,  how  to  detect,  and  by  what  means  to  get  rid
of  evil  spirits,  or  how  to  conjure  up  demons — as  these  are
indicated  in  the  Talmud.  Considering  the  state  of  civilisation
at  the  time,  and  the  general  prevalence  of  superstition,  we
should  perhaps  have  scarcely  wondered  at  all  this,  had  it  not
been  for  the  claims  which  the  Rabbis  set  up  to  Divine  autho-
rity, and  the  terrible  contrast  exhibited  between  their  teach-
ing and  that — we  will  not  say  of  the  New,  but — of  the  Old
Testament.  In  reference  to  the  "phylacteries,"  even  the
language  of  Josephus  (Ant.  iv.  8,  13)  savours  of  belief  in  their
magical  efficacy  ;  although  in  this  matter  also  he  is  true  to
himself,  showing  us,  at  the  same  time,  that  certain  proverbial
views  of  gratitude  were  already  in  vogue  in  his  time.  For,
writing  of  the  phylacteries,  which,  he  maintains,  the  Jews  wore
in  remembrance  of  their  past  deliverance,  he  observes,  that  this
expression  of  their  gratitude  "  served  not  only  by  way  of  return
for  past,  but  also  byway  of  invitation  of  future  favours!"
Many  instances  of  the  magical  ideas  attaching  to  these  "  amu-
lets" might  be  quoted  ;  but  the  following  will  suffice.  It  is  said
that,  when  a  certain  Rabbi  left  the  audience  of  some  king,  he
had  turned  his  back  upon  the  monarch.  Upon  this,  the  courtiers
would  have  killed  the  Rabbi,  but  were  deterred  by  seeing  that
the  straps  of  his  "  tephillin  "  shone  like  bands  of  fire  about
him  ;  thus  verifying  the  promise  in  Deut.  xxviii.  10  (Jer.  Ber.
v.  i).  Indeed,  we  have  it  expressly  stated  in  an  ancient  Jewish
Targum  (that  on  Cant.  viii.  3),  that  the  "tephillin"  prevented
all  hostile  demons  from  doing  injury  to  any  Israelite.
'"  What  has  been  said  will  in  some  measure  prepare  the  reader
(or  investigating  the  history  and  influence  of  the  Pharisees  at
the  time  of  Christ.  Let  it  be  borne  in  mind,  that  patriotism


Among  the  People,  and  with  the  Pharisees.     225

and  religion  equally  combined  to  raise  them  in  popular  esteem.
What  made  Palestine  a  land  separate  and  distinct  from
the  heathen  nations  around,  among  whom  the  ruling  families
would  fain  have  merged  them,  was  that  Jewish  element
which  the  Pharisees  represented.  Their  very  origin  as  a  party
stretched  back  to  the  great  national  struggle  which  had  freed
the  soil  of  Palestine  from  Syrian  domination.  In  turn,  the
Pharisees  had  deserted  those  Maccabees  whom  formerly  they
had  supported,  and  dared  persecution  and  death,  when  the
descendants  of  the  Maccabees  declined  into  worldly  pomp
and  Grecian  ways,  and  would  combine  the  royal  crown  of
David  with  the  high -priest's  mitre.  And  now,  whoever
might  fear  Herod  or  his  family,  the  Pharisees  at  least
would  not  compromise  their  principles.  Again,  were  they
not  the  representatives  of  the  Divine  law — not  only  of  that
given  to  Israel  on  Mount  Sinai,  but  also  of  those  more  secret
ordinances  which  were  only  verbally  communicated  to  Moses,
in  explanation  of,  and  addition  to  the  law  ?  If  they  had  made
"  a  hedge  "  around  the  law,  it  was  only  for  the  safety  of  Israel,
and  for  their  better  separation  from  all  that  was  impure,  as
well  as  from  the  Gentiles.  As  for  themselves,  they  were
bound  by  vows  and  obligations  of  the  strictest  kind.  Their
dealings  with  the  world  outside  their  fraternity,  their  occu-
pations, their  practices,  their  bearing,  their  very  dress  and
appearance  among  that  motley  crowd — either  careless,  gay,
and  Grecianising,  or  self-condemned  by  a  practice  in  sad  dis-
cord with  their  Jewish  profession  and  principles — would  gain
for  them  the  distinction  of  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts,  and
chief  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and  greetings  in  the  markets,
and  to  be  called  of  men,  Rabbi,  Rabbi  ("  my  great  one,  my
great  one  "),  in  which  their  hearts  so  much  delighted.

Q


226  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

In  very  truth  they  mostly  did  represent,  in  some  one  or
other  degree  of  their  order,  what  of  earnestness  and  religions
zeal  there  was  in  the  land.  Their  name — probably  in  the
first  instance  not  chosen  by  themselves — had  become  to  some
a  byword,  to  others  a  party  title.  And  sadly  they  had
declined  from  their  original  tendency — at  least  in  most  cases.
They  were  not  necessarily  "  scribes,"  nor  "  lawyers,"  nor  yet
"  teachers  of  the  law."  Nor  were  they  a  sect,  in  the  ordinary
sense  of  the  term.  But  they  were  a  fraternity,  which  con-  ,
sisted  of  various  degrees,  to  which  there  was  a  regular  novi-~
tiate,  and  which  was  bound  by  special  vows  and  obligations!)
This  fraternity  was,  so  to  speak,  hereditary ;  so  that  St.  Paul
could  in  very  truth  speak  of  himself  as  "  a  Pharisee  of  the
Pharisees  " — "  a  Pharisee  the  son  of  a  Pharisee."  That  their
general  principles  became  dominant,  and  that  they  gave  its
distinctiveness  alike  to  the  teaching  and  the  practices  of  the
Synagogue,  is  sufficiently  known.  But  what  tremendous
influence  they  must  have  wielded  to  attain  this  position  will
best  appear  from  the  single  fact,  which  has  apparently  been
too  much  overlooked,  of  their  almost  incredibly  small  numbers.
According  to  Josephus  (Ant.  xvii.  2,  4),  the  number  of  the
fraternity  amounted  at  the  time  of  Herod  only  to  about  six
thousand.  Yet  this  inconsiderable  minority  could  cast
Judaism  in  its  mould,  and  for  such  terrible  evil  give  its  final
direction  to  the  nation  \  f  Surely  the  springs  of  such  a  move-
ment must  have  reached  down  to  the  very  heart  of  Jewish
religious  life.  What  these  were,  and  how  they  affected  the
whole  community,  deserves  and  requires  not  merely  passing
notice,  but  special  and  careful  attention.


CHAPTER     XIV.
THE  "FRATERNITY"  OF  PHARISEES.

TO  realise  the  state  of  religious  society  at  the  time  of  our
Lord,  the  fact  that  the  Pharisees  were  a  regular  "  order,"
and  that  there  were  many  such  "  fraternities,"  in  great  measure
the  outcome  of  the  original  Pharisees,  must  always  be  kept
in  view.  For  the  New  Testament  simply  transports  us  among
contemporary  scenes  and  actors,  taking  the  then  existent  state
of  things,  so  to  speak,  for  granted.  But  the  fact  referred  to
explains  many  seemingly  strange  circumstances,  and  casts
fresh  light  upon  all.  Thus,  if,  to  choose  an  illustration,  we
should  wonder  how  so  early  as  the  morning  after  the  long
discussion  in  the  Sanhedrim,  which  must  have  occupied  a
considerable  part  of  the  day,  "  more  than  forty  men  "  should
have  been  found  "  banded  together "  under  an  anathema,
neither  to  eat  nor  to  drink  "  till  they  had  killed  Paul "  (Acts
xxiii.  12,  2 1);  and,  still  more,  how  such  "a  conspiracy,"  or
rather  "conjuration,"  which,  in  the  nature  of  it,  would  be  kept
a  profound  secret,  should  have  become  known  to  "  Paul's
sister's  son"  (ver.  16),  the  circumstances  of  the  case  furnish
a  sufficient  explanation.  |  The  Pharisees  were  avowedly  a
"Chabura" — that  is,  a  fraternity  or  "guild" — and  they,  or


228  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

some  of  their  kindred  fraternities,  would  furnish  the  ready
material  for  such  a  "  band,"  to  whom  this  additional  "  vow  "
would  be  nothing  new  nor  strange,  and,  murderous  though
it  sounded,  only  seem  a  farther  carrying  out  of  the  principles
of  their  "  order."  Again,  since  the  wife  and  all  the  children
of  a  "  chaber,"  or  member,  were  ipso  facto  members  of  the
"Chabura,"  and  Paul's  father  had  been  a  "Pharisee"  (ver.  6),
Paul's  sister  also  would  by  virtue  of  her  birth  belong  to  the
fraternity,  even  irrespective  of  the  probability  that,  in  accord-
ance with  the  principles  of  the  party,  she  would  have  married
into  a  Pharisaical  family.  Nor  need  we  wonder  that  the  rage
of  the  whole  "  order  "  against  Paul  should  have  gone  to  an
extreme,  for  which  ordinary  Jewish  zeal  would  scarcely  ac-
count. |(The  day  before,  the  excitement  of  discussion  m  the
Sanhedrim  had  engrossed  their  attention,  and  in  a  measure
diverted  it  from  Paul.  The  apologetic  remark  then  made
(ver.  9),  "  If  a  spirit  or  an  angel  hath  spoken  to  him,  let  us
not  fight  against  God,"  coming  immediately  after  the  notice
(ver.  8)  that  the  Sadducees  said,  there  was  "  neither  angel  nor
spirit,"  may  indicate,  that  the  Pharisees  were  quite  as  anxious
for  a  dogmatic  victory  over  their  opponents  as  to  throw  the
shield  of  the  "  fraternity  "  over  one  of  its  professed  members.
But  with  the  night  other  and  cooler  thoughts  came.  It  might
be  well  enough  to  defend  one  of  their  order  against  the
Sadducees,  but  it  was  intolerable  to  have  such  a  member  in
the  fraternity.  A  grosser  outrage  on  every  principle  and  vow
— nay,  on  the  very  reason  of  being  of  the  whole  "  Chabura  " —
could  scarcely  be  conceived  than  the  conduct  of  St.  Paul  and
the  views  which  he  avowed.  Even  regarding  him  as  a  simple
Israelite,  the  multitude  which  thronged  the  Temple  had,  on
the  day  before,  been  only  restrained  by  the  heathens  from


The  "Fraternity"  of  Pharisees.  229

executing  the  summary  vengeance  of  "  death  by  the  rebel's
beating."  How  much  truer  was  it  as  the  deliberate  conviction
of  the  party,  and  not  merely  the  cry  of  an  excited  popu-
lace, "  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth  ;  for  it  is  not
fit  that  he  should  live  !  "  But  while  we  thus  understand  the
conduct  of  the  Pharisees,  we  need  be  under  no  apprehension
as  to  the  consequences  to  those  "  more  than  forty  men  "  of
their  rash  vow.  The  Jerusalem  Talmud  (Avod.  Sar.  40  a]
here  furnishes  the  following  curious  illustration,  which  almost
reads  like  a  commentary  :  "  If  a  man  makes  a  vow  to  abstain
from  food,  Woe  to  him  if  he  eateth,  and,  Woe  to  him  if  he  does
not  eat !  If  he  eateth,  he  sinneth  against  his  vow ;  if  he  does
not  eat,  he  sins  against  his  life.  What  then  must  he  do  ?  Let
him  go  before  *  the  sages,'  and  they  will  absolve  him  from  his
vow."  In  connection  with  the  whole  of  this  matter  it  is,  to
say  the  least,  a  very  curious  coincidence  that,  at  the  very  time
when  the  party  so  acted  against  St.  Paul,  or  immediately
afterwards,  three  new  enactments  should  have  been  passed  by
Simeon,  the  son  of  Gamaliel  (Paul's  teacher),  which  would
exactly  meet  the  case  of  St.  Paul.  The  first  of  these
ordained,  that  in  future  the  children  of  a  "  Chaber "  should
not  be  necessarily  such,  but  themselves  require  special  and
individual  reception  into  the  "  order ; "  the  second,  that  the
-previous  conduct  of  the  candidate  should  be  considered  before
admitting  him  into  the  fraternity ;  while  the  third  enjoined,
that  any  member  who  had  left  the  "order,"  or  become  a
publican,  should  never  afterwards  be  received  back  again.

Three  words  of  modern  significance,  with  which  ot  late  we
have  all  become  too  familiar,  will  probably  better  help  us  to
understand  the  whole  state  of  matters  than  more  elaborate
explanations.  They  are  connected  with  that  ecclesiastical


230  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

system  which  in  so  many  respects  seems  the  counterpart
of  Rabbinism.  Ultramontanism  is  a  direction  of  religious
thought ;  the  Ultramontanes  are  a  party  ;  and  the  Jesuits  not
only  its  fullest  embodiment,  but  an  "  order,"  which,  originating
in  a  revival  of  the  spirit  of  the  Papacy,  gave  rise  to  the  Ultra-
montanes as  a  party,  and,  in  the  wider  diffusion  of  their
principles,  to  Ultramontanism  as  a  tendency.  Now,  all  this
applies  equally  to  the  Pharisees  and  to  Pharisaism.  To  make
the  analogy  complete,  the  order  of  the  Jesuits  also  consists  of
four  degrees  ] — curiously  enough,  the  exact  number  of  those
in  the  fraternity  of  "  the  Pharisees  ! "  Like  that  of  the  Jesuits,
the  order  of  the  Pharisees  originated  in  a  period  of  great
religious  reaction.  They  themselves  delighted  in  tracing  their
history  up  to  the  time  of  Ezra,  and  there  may  have  been
substantial,  though  not  literal  truth  in  their  claim.  For  we
read  in  Ezra  vi.  21  ;  ix.  i ;  x.  n  ;  and  Neh.  ix.  2  of  the
"  Nivdalim,"  or  those  who  had  "  separated  "  themselves  "  from
the  filthiness  of  the  heathen ; "  while  in  Neh.  x.  29  we  find,
that  they  entered  into  a  "  solemn  league  and  covenant,"  with
definite  vows  and  obligations.  Now,  it  is  quite  true  that  the
Aramaean  word  "  Perishuth "  also  means  "  separation,"  and
that  the  "  Perushim,"  or  Pharisees,  of  the  Mishnah  are,  so  far
as  the  meaning  of  the  term  is  concerned,  "  the  separated,"  or
the  "Nivdalim"  of  their  period.  But  although  they  could
thus,  not  only  linguistically  but  historically,  trace  their  origin
to  those  who  had  "  separated  "  themselves  at  the  time  of  Ezra
and  Nehemiah,  they  were  not  their  successors  in  spirit ;  and

1  When  speaking  of  the  four  degrees  in  the  order  of  Jesuits,  we  refer  to  those
which  are  professed.  We  are,  of  course,  aware  of  the  existence  of  the  so-called
" professi  triuni  votomm  "  of  whom  nothing  definite  is  really  known  by  the  outside
world,  and  whom  we  may  regard  as  "the  secret  Jesuits,"  and  of  that  of  lay  and
Clerical  "  coadjutors,"  whose  services  and  vows  are  merely  temporary.


The  "Fraternity"  of  Pharisees.  231

the  difference  between  the  designations  "  Nivdalim "  and
"Perushim"  marks  also  the  widest  possible  internal  differ-
ence, albeit  it  may  have  been  gradually  brought  about  in  the
course  of  historical  development.  All  this  will  become  imme-
diately more  plain.

jfAt  the  time  of  Ezra,  as  already  noted,  there  was  a  great
religious  revival  among  those  who  had  returned  to  the  land  of
their  fathers.  The  profession  which  had  of  old  only  character-
ised individuals  in  Israel  (Ps.  xxx.  4 ;  xxxi.  23  ;  xxxvii.  28)
was  now  taken  up  by  the  covenanted  people  as  a  whole :  they
became  the  "Chasidim"  or  "pious"  (rendered  in  the  Authorised
Version,  "  saints ").  As  "  Chasidim,"  they  resolved  to  be
"  Nivdalim,"  or  "  separated  from  all  filthiness  of  heathenism  "
around.  The  one  represented,  so  to  speak,  the  positive  ;  the
other,  the  negative  element  in  their  religion.  It  is  deeply
interesting  to  notice,  how  the  former  Pharisee  (or  "  separated
one "),  Paul,  had  this  in  view  in  tracing  the  Christian  life  as
that  of  the  true  "  chasid,"  and  therefore  "  Nivdal " — in  oppo-
sition to  the  Pharisees  of  externalism — in  such  passages  as
2  Cor.  vi.  I4~vii.  I,  closing  with  this  admonition  to  "cleanse
ourselves  from  all  filthiness l  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting
holiness  in  the  fear  of  God."  And  so  St.  Paul's  former  life
and  thinking  seem  ever  to  have  served  him  as  the  type  of  the
spiritual  realities  of  his  new  state.2

1  The  Greek  word  for  "filthiness"  occurs  in  this  passage  only,  but  the  verb
from  which  it  is  derived  seems  to  have  a  ceremonial  allusion  attaching  to  it  in  the
three  passages  in  which  it  is  used  :  I  Cor.  viii.  7 ;  Rev.  iii.  4 ;  xiv.  4.

2  If  St.  Paul  was  originally  a  Pharisee,  the  accounts  given  by  the  earliest  tra-
dition (Euseb.   H.  E.  ii.  23),    compared  with  that  of  Josephus  (Ant.  xx.  9,   l),
would  almost  lead   us  to  infer  that   St.  James  was  a  "Chasid."     All  the  more
significant  would  then  be  the  part  he  took  in  removing  the  yoke  of  the  law  from
the  Gentile  converts  (Acts  xv.  13-21).


232  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Two  points  in  Jewish  history  here  claim  our  special  atten  -
tion,  without  attempting  to  unravel  the  whole  somewhat
tangled  web  of  events.  The  first  is  the  period  immediately
after  Alexander  the  Great.  It  was  one  of  the  objects  of  the
empire  which  he  founded  to  Grecianise  the  world ;  and  that
object  was  fully  prosecuted  by  his  successors.  Accordingly,
we  find  a  circle  of  Grecian  cities  creeping  up  along  the  coast,
from  Anthedon  and  Gaza  in  the  south,  northwards  to  Tyre
and  Seleucia,  and  eastwards  to  Damascus,  Gadara,  Pella,  and
Philadelphia,  wholly  belting  the  land  of  Israel.  Thence  the
movement  advanced  into  the  interior,  taking  foothold  in
Galilee  and  Samaria,  and  gathering  a  party  with  increasing
influence  and  spreading  numbers  among  the  people.  Now  it
was  under  these  circumstances,  that  the  "  Chasidim "  as  a
party  stood  out  to  stem  the  torrent,  which  threatened  to
overwhelm  alike  the  religion  and  the  nationality  of  Israel.
The  actual  contest  soon  came,  and  with  it  the  second  grand
period  in  the  history  of  Judaism.  Alexander  the  Great  had
died  in  July  323  B.C.  About  a  century  and  a  half  later,  the
"  Chasidim "  had  gathered  round  the  Maccabees  for  Israel's
God  and  for  Israel.  But  the  zeal  of  the  Maccabees  soon  gave
place  to  worldly  ambition  and  projects.  When  these  leaders
united  in  their  person  the  high-priestly  with  the  royal  dignity,
the  party  of  the  "  Chasidim "  not  only  deserted  them,  but
went  into  open  opposition.  They  called  on  them  to  resign
the  high-priesthood,  and  were  ready  to  suffer  martyrdom,  as
many  of  them  did,  for  their  outspoken  convictions.  Thence-
forth the  "  Chasidim  "  of  the  early  type  disappear  as  a  class.
They  had,  as  a  party,  already  given  place  to  the  Pharisees —
the  modern  "  Nivdalim  ;"  and  when  we  meet  them  again  they
are  only  a  higher  order  or  branch  of  the  Pharisees — "the


The  "Fraternity"  of  Pharisees.  233

pious  "  of  old  having,  so  to  speak,  become  "  pietists."  Tradi-
tion (Men.  40)  expressly  distinguishes  "  the  early  Chasidim  "
(harishonim)  from  "the  later"  (acheronim).  No  doubt,  those
are  some  of  their  principles,  although  tinged  with  later
colouring,  which  are  handed  down  as  the  characteristics  of  the
"  chasid  "  in  such  sayings  of  the  Mishnah  as  :  "  What  is  mine
is  thine,  and  what  is  thine  remains  thine  as  well"  (P.  Ab.  V.
10) ;  "Hard  to  make  angry,  but  easy  to  reconcile"  (n);
"Giving  alms,  and  inducing  others  to  do  likewise"  (13);
"  Going  to  the  house  of  learning,  and  at  the  same  time  doing
good  works  "  (14).

The  earliest  mention  of  the  Pharisees  occurs  at  the  time  of
the  Maccabees.  As  a  "  fraternity  "  we  meet  them  first  under
the  rule  of  John  Hyrcanus,  the  fourth  of  the  Maccabees  from
Mattathias  (135-105  B.C.) ;  although  Josephus  speaks  of  them
already  two  reigns  earlier,  at  the  time  of  Jonathan  (Ant.  xiii.
5,  9).  He  may  have  done  so  by  anticipation,  or  applying
later  terms  to  earlier  circumstances,  since  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  Essenes,  whom  he  names  at  the  same  time,
had  not  then  any  corporate  existence.  Without  questioning
that,  to  use  a  modern  term,  "  the  direction "  existed  at  the
time  of  Jonathan,1  we  can  put  our  finger  on  a  definite  event
with  which  the  origin  of  "  the  fraternity  "  of  the  Pharisees  is
connected.  From  Jewish  writings  we  learn,  that  at  the  time
of  Hyrcanus  a  commission  was  appointed  to  inquire  through-
out the  land,  how  the  Divine  law  of  religious  contributions
was  observed  by  the  people.2  The  result  showed  that,  while

1  In  proof  of  this,  it  may  be  stated  that  before  the  formal  institution  of  the
"order,"  R.  Jose,  the  son  of  Joezer,  declared  all  foreign  glass  vessels,  and  indeed
the  whole  soil  of  heathen  lands,  " unclean,"  thus  "separating"  Israel  from  all
possible  intercourse  with  Gentiles.

*  It  may  be  to  the  decrees  then  enacted  by  Hyrcanus  that  Josephus  refers  (Ant.


234  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

the  "  therumah,"1  or  priestly  "heave-offerings,"  was  regularly
given,  neither  the  first  or  Levitical  tithe,  nor  yet  the  so-called
"  second  "  or  "  poor's  tithe,"  was  paid,  as  the  law  enjoined.
But  such  transgression  involved  mortal  sin,  since  it  implied
the  personal  use  of  what  really  belonged  to  the  Lord.
Then  it  was  that  the  following  arrangements  were  made.  All
that  the  "  country  people  "  (am  ha-aretz)  sold  was  to  be  con-
sidered "  demai " — a  word  derived  from  the  Greek  for
"  people,"  and  so  betraying  the  time  of  its  introduction,  but
really  implying  that  it  was  "  doubtful "  whether  or  nor  it  had
been  tithed.  In  such  cases  the  buyer  had  to  regard  the
"  therumah,"  and  the  "  poor's  tithe  "  as  still  due  on  what  he
had  purchased.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Pharisees  formed  a
"  Chabura,"  or  fraternity,  of  which  each  member — "  Chaber,"
or  "  companion  " — bound  himself  to  pay  these  tithes  before
use  or  sale.  Each  "  Chaber  "  was  regarded  as  "  neeman,"  or
"  credited  " — his  produce  being  freely  bought  and  sold  by  the
rest  of  the  "  Chaberim."2  Of  course,  the  burden  of  additional
expense  which  this  involved  to  each  non-"  chaber  "  was  very

xiii.  10,  6),  when  he  speaks  of  their  "abolition"  after  Hyrcanus  broke  with  the
Pharisaical  party.

1  I  cannot  here  enter  into  explanations  of  the  therumah,  but  must  refer  the
reader  to  my  book  on  The  Temple  and  its  Services,  p.  331,  etc.

2  It  is  with  very  great  reluctance  that  I  dissent  from  such  an  authority  as  Canon
Lightfoot.    But  I  cannot  regard  the  reference  to  Niddah,  33  £,  in  his  admirable  essay
on  the  Essenes  (Commentary  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  p.  130),  as  conclusive  of
the  fact  that  a  Sadducee  and  even  a  Samaritan  might  be  a  "  Chaber."     Of  course,
there  is  a  general  application  of  the  term    '  Chaber  "  to  any  kind  of  association.
But  the  whole  passage  Niddah,  33  6,  originating  in  a  prandial  discussion  on  which
R.  Papah  is  very  reluctant  to  enter,  shows  that  neither  the  term  "  Samaritan  "  nor
yet  that  of  "  Chaber"  can  be  pressed  in  its  primary  meaning.     If  anything,  the
statement  that,  under  given  circumstances,    "all  Israel  are  to  be  regarded  as
Chaberim"  would  be  decisive,  that  strict  historical  value  must  not  be  attached  to
the  expressions  of  Rabbi  Papah.


The  " Fraternity^  of  Pharisees  235

great,  since  he  had  to  pay  "therumah"  and  tithe  on  all
that  he  purchased  or  used,  while  the  Pharisee  who  bought
from  another  Pharisee  was  free.  One  cannot  help  suspecting
that  this,  in  connection  with  kindred  enactments,  which  bore
very  hard  upon  the  mass  of  the  people,  while  they  left  "  the
Pharisee  "  untouched^  may  underlie  the  charge  of  our  Lord
(Matt,  xxiii.  4) :  "They  bind  heavy  burdens  and  grievous  to
be  borne,  and  lay  them  on  men's  shoulders ;  but  they  them-
selves will  not  move  them  with  one  of  their  fingers."

But  the  rigorous  discharge  of  tithes  was  only  one  part
of  the  obligations  of  a  "  Chaber."  The  other  part  consisted
in  an  equally  rigorous  submission  to  all  the  laws  of  Levitical
purity  as  then  understood.  Indeed,  the  varied  questions  as  to
what  was,  or  what  made  "  clean,"  divided  the  one  "  order  "  of
Pharisees  into  members  of  various  degrees.  Four  such  degrees,
according  to  increasing  strictness  in  "making  clean,"  are
mentioned.  It  would  take  too  long  to  explain  this  fourfold
gradation  in  its  details.  Suffice  it,  that,  generally  speaking,
a  member  of  the  first  degree  was  called  a  "  Chaber,"  or  "  Ben
hacheneseth,"  "  son  of  the  union  "  —  an  ordinary  Pharisee  ;
while  the  other  three  degrees  were  ranked  together  under  the
generic  name  of  "  Teharoth "  (purifications).  These  latter
were  probably  the  "  Chasidim "  of  the  later  period.  The
"  Chaber,"  or  ordinary  Pharisee,  only  bound  himself  to  tithing
and  avoidance  of  all  Levitical  uncleanness.  The  higher
degrees,  on  the  other  hand,  took  increasingly  strict  vows.
Any  one  might  enter  "  the  order "  if  he  took,  before  three
members,  the  solemn  vow  of  observing  the  obligations  of  the
fraternity.  A  novitiate  of  a  year  (which  was  afterwards
shortened)  was,  however,  necessary.  The  wife  or  widow  of  a
"  Chaber,"  and  his  children,  were  regarded  as  members  of  the


236  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

iraternity.  Those  who  entered  the  family  of  a  "  Pharisee  *
had  also  to  seek  admission  into  the  "  order."  The  genera\
obligations  of  a  "  Chaber  "  towards  those  that  were  "  without "
the  fraternity  were  as  follows.  He  was  neither  to  buy  from,
nor  to  sell  to  him  anything,  either  in  a  dry  or  fluid  state ;  he
was  neither  to  eat  at  his  table  (as  he  might  thus  partake
of  what  had  not  been  tithed),  nor  to  admit  him  to  his  table,
unless  he  had  put  on  the  garments  of  a  "  Chaber  "  (as  his
own  old  ones  might  else  have  carried  defilement) ;  nor  to  go
into  any  burying-place  ;  nor  to  give  "  therumah  "  or  tithes  to
any  priest  who  was  not  a  member  of  the  fraternity  ;  nor  to  do
anything  in  presence  of  an  "  am  ha-aretz,"  or  non-"  Chaber,"
which  brought  up  points  connected  with  the  laws  of  purifica-
tion, etc.  To  these,  other  ordinances,  partly  of  an  ascetic
character,  were  added  at  a  later  period.  But  what  is  specially
remarkable  is  that  not  only  was  a  novitiate  required  for  the
higher  grades,  similar  to  that  on  first  entering  the  order  ;  but
that,  just  as  the  garment  of  a  non-"  chaber "  defiled  a
"  Chaber  "  of  the  first  degree,  that  of  the  latter  equally  defiled
him  of  the  second  degree,  and  so  on.1

To  sum  up  then  :  the  fraternity  of  the  Pharisees  were  bound
by  these  two  vows — that  of  tithing  and  that  in  regard  to  puri-
fications. As  the  most  varied  questions  would  here  arise  in
practice,  which  certainly  were  not  answered  in  the  law  of
Moses,  the  "traditions,"  which  were  supposed  to  explain  and
supplement  the  Divine  law,  became  necessary.  j  In  point  of
fact,  the  Rabbis  speak  of  them  in  that  sense,  and  describe

1  It  is  impossible  here  to  reproduce  the  Talmudical  passages  in  evidence.  But
the  two  obligations  of  " making  clean  "  and  of  "tithing,"  together  with  the
arrangement  of  the  Pharisees  into  various  grades,  are  even  referred  to  in  the
Mishnah  (Chag.  ii.  5,  6,  and  Dcmai  ii.  2,  3).


The  "Fraternity"  of  Pharisees.-.          237

.x  •/  \j  i


them  as  "  a  hedge  "  around  Israel  and  its  law.  That  these
traditions  should  have  been  traced  up  to  oral  communications
made  to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  also  deduced  by  ingenious
methods  from  the  letter  of  Scripture,  was  only  a  further
necessity  of  the  case.  The  result  was  a  system  of  pure  ex-
ternalism,  which  often  contravened  the  spirit  of  those  very
ordinances,  the  letter  of  which  was  slavishly  worshipped.  To
what  arrant  hypocrisy  it  often  gave  rise,  appears  from  Rabbi-
nical writings  almost  as  much  as  from  the  New  Testament.
We  can  understand  how  those  "  blind  guides  "  would  often  be
as  great  a  trouble  to  their  own  party  as  to  others.  "  The
plague  of  Pharisaism  "  was  not  an  uncommon  expression  ;  and
this  religious  sore  is  ranked  with  "a  silly  pietist,  a  cunning
sinner,  and  a  woman  Pharisee,"  as  constituting  "the  troubles
of  life"  (Sot.  iii.  4).  "  Shall  we  stop  to  explain  the  opinions
of  Pharisees  ? "  asks  a  Rabbi,  in  supreme  contempt  for  "  the
order"  as  such.  "  It  is  as  a  tradition  among  the  Pharisees,"
we  read  (Ab.  de  R.  Nathan,  5),  "  to  torment  themselves  in  this
world,  and  yet  they  will  not  get  anything  in  the  next."  It
was  suggested  by  the  Sadducees,  that  "  the  Pharisees  would
by-and-by  subject  the  globe  of  the  sun  itself  to  their  purifica-
tions." On  the  other  hand,  almost  Epicurean  sentences  are
quoted  among  their  utterances,  such  as,  "  Make  haste,  eat  and
drink,  for  the  world  in  which  we  are  is  like  a  wedding  feast ; "
"  If  thou  possessest  anything,  make  good  cheer  of  it ;  for
there  is  no  pleasure  underneath  the  sod,  and  death  gives  no
respite.  .  .  .  Men  are  like  the  flowers  of  the  field ;  some
flourish,  while  others  fade  away."

"  Like  the  flowers  of  the  field  !"  What  far  other  teaching
of  another  Rabbi,  Whom  these  rejected  with  scorn,  do  the
words  recall!  And  when  from  their  words  we  turn  to  the


238  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

kingdom  which  He  came  to  found,  we  can  quite  under-
stand the  essential  antagonism  of  nature  between  the  two.
Assuredly,  it  has  been  a  bold  stretch  of  assertion  to  connect
in  any  way  the  origin  or  characteristics  of  Christianity  with
the  Rabbis.  Yet,  when  we  bring  the  picture  of  Pharisaism,
as  drawn  in  Rabbinical  writings,  side  by  side  with  the  sketch
of  it  given  by  our  Lord,  we  are  struck  not  only  with  the  life-
likeness,  but  with  the  selection  of  the  distinctive  features  of
Pharisaism  presented  in  His  reproofs.  Indeed,  we  might
almost  index  the  history  of  Pharisaism  by  passages  from
the  New  Testament.  The  "tithing  of  mint  and  anise,"  to
the  neglect  of  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  and  "the
cleansing  "  of  the  outside — these  twofold  obligations  of  the
Pharisees,  "  hedged  around,"  as  they  were,  by  a  traditionalism
which  made  void  the  spirit  of  the  law,  and  which  manifested
itself  in  gross  hypocrisy  and  religious  boasting — are  they  not
what  *ve  have  just  traced  in  the  history  of  "the  order ?"


CHAPTER    XV.

RELATION   OF  THE   PHARISEES  TO   THE    SADDUCEES  AND
ESSENES,   AND   TO   THE   GOSPEL   OF   CHRIST.

ON  taking  a  retrospective  view  of  Pharisaism,  as  we  have
described  it,  there  is  a  saying  of  our  Lord  which  at
first  sight  seems  almost  unaccountable.  Yet  it  is  clear  and
emphatic.  "All  therefore  whatsoever  they  bid  you  observe,
that  observe  and  do"  (Matt,  xxiii.  3).  But  if  the  early
disciples  were  not  to  break  at  once  and  for  ever  with  the
Jewish  community,  such  a  direction  was  absolutely  need-
ful. For,  though  the  Pharisees  were  only  "  an  order,"  Phari-
saism, like  modern  Ultramontanism,  had  not  only  become
the  leading  direction  of  theological  thought,  but  its  prin-
ciples were  solemnly  proclaimed,  and  universally  acted  upon
— and  the  latter,  even  by  their  opponents  the  Sadducees.  A
Sadducee  in  the  Temple  or  on  the  seat  of  judgment  would
be  obliged  to  act  and  decide  precisely  like  a  Pharisee.  Not
that  the  party  had  not  attempted  to  give  dominance  to  their
peculiar  views.  But  they  were  fairly  vanquished,  and  it  is
said  that  they  themselves  destroyed  the  book  of  Sadducean
ordinances,  which  they  had  at  one  time  drawn  up.  And  the
Pharisees  celebrated  each  dogmatic  victory  by  a  feast!


240  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

What  is  perhaps  the  oldest  post-Biblical  Hebrew  book — the
"  Megillath  Taanith,"  or  roll  of  fasts — is  chiefly  a  Pharisaic
calendar  of  self-glorification,  in  which  dogmatic  victories  are
made  days  when  fasting,  and  sometimes  even  mourning,
is  prohibited.  Whatever,  therefore,  the  dogmatic  views  of
the  Sadducees  were,  and  however  they  might,  where  possible,
indulge  personal  bias,  yet  in  office  both  parties  acted  as
Pharisees.  They  were  well  matched  indeed.  When  a  Sad-
ducean  high-priest,  on  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  poured  out
the  water  on  the  ground  instead  of  into  the  silver  funnel  of
the  altar,  Maccabean  king  though  he  was,  he  scarce  escaped
with  his  life,  and  ever  afterwards  the  shout  resounded  from
all  parts  of  the  Temple,  "  Hold  up  thy  hand,"  as  the  priest
yearly  performed  this  part  of  the  service.  The  Sadducees
held,  that  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  the  high-priest  should
light  the  incense  before  he  actually  entered  the  Most  Holy
Place.  As  this  was  contrary  to  the  views  of  the  Pharisees,
they  took  care  to  bind  him  by  an  oath  to  observe  their  ritual
customs  before  allowing  him  to  officiate  at  all.  It  was  in  vain
that  the  Sadducees  argued,  that  the  daily  sacrifices  should  not
be  defrayed  from  the  public  treasury,  but  from  special  con-
tributions. They  had  to  submit,  and  besides  to  join  in  the
kind  of  half-holiday  which  the  jubilant  majority  inscribed  in
their  calendar  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  the  decision.
The  Pharisees  held,  that  the  time  between  Easter  and
Pentecost  should  be  counted  from  the  second  day  of  the
feast ;  the  Sadducees  insisted  that  it  should  commence  with
the  literal  "Sabbath"  after  the  festive  day.1  But,  despite
argument,  the  Sadducees  had  to  join  when  the  solemn

1  I  would  here  refer  the  reader  who  wishes  further  details  to  the  accounts  of  the
feasts  and  services  in  the  Temple,  given  in  my  volume  on  The  Temple.


Relation  of  the  Pharisees  to  the  Sadducees,  etc.   241

procession  went  on  the  afternoon  of  the  feast  to  cut  down
the  "first  sheaf,"  and  to  reckon  Pentecost  as  did  their
opponents.

We  have  here  referred  to  only  a  few  of  the  differences  in
ritual  between  the  views  of  the  Sadducees  and  those  of  the
Pharisees.  The  essential  principle  of  them  lay  in  this,  that
the  Sadducees  would  hold  by  the  simple  letter  of  the  law —
do  neither  more  nor  less,  whether  the  consequences  were  to
make  decisions  more  severe  or  more  easy.  The  same  prin-
ciple they  applied  in  their  juridical  and  also  in  their  doctrinal
views.  It  would  take  us  too  much  into  detail  to  explain  the
former.  But  the  reader  will  understand  how  this  literality
would,  as  a  rule,  make  their  judicial  decisions  (or  rather  such
as  they  had  proposed)  far  more  strict  than  those  of  the
Pharisees,  by  a  rigidly  literal  application  of  the  principle,  "  an
eye  for  an  eye  ;  a  tooth  for  a  tooth."  The  same  holds  true
in  regard  to  the  laws  of  purification,  and  to  those  which
regulated  inheritance.  The  doctrinal  views  of  the  Sadducees
are  sufficiently  known  from  the  New  Testament.  It  is  quite
true  that,  in  opposition  to  Sadducean  views  as  to  the  non-
existence  of  another  world  and  the  resurrection,  the  Pharisees
altered  the  former  Temple-formula  into  "  Blessed  be  God
from  world  to  world "  (from  generation  to  generation  ;  or,
"  world  without  end  "),  to  show  that  after  the  present  there
was  another  life  of  blessing  and  punishment,  of  joy  and
sorrow.  But  the  Talmud  expressly  states  that  the  real  prin-
ciple of  the  Sadducees  was  not,  that  there  was  no  resurrection,
but  only  that  it  could  not  be  proved  from  the  Thorah,  or
Law.  From  this  there  was,  of  course,  but  a  short  step  to  the
entire  denial  of  the  doctrine  ;  and  no  doubt  it  was  taken  by
the  vast  majority  of  the  party.  But  here  also  it  was  again

R


242  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

their  principle  of  strict  literality,  which  underlay  even  the
most  extreme  of  their  errors.

This  principle  was  indeed  absolutely  necessary  to  their
very  existence.  We  have  traced  the  Pharisees  not  only  to  a
definite  period,  but  to  a  special  event ;  and  we  have  been  able
perfectly  to  explain  their  name  as  "  the  separated  "  Not  that
we  presume  they  gave  it  to  themselves,  for  no  sect  or  party
ever  takes  a  name  ;  they  all  pretend  to  require  no  distinctive
title,  because  they  alone  genuinely  and  faithfully  represent
the  truth  itself.  But  when  they  were  called  Pharisees,  the
"  Chaberim,"  no  doubt,  took  kindly  to  the  popular  designa-
tion. It  was  to  them — to  use  an  illustration — what  the  name
"  Puritans  "  was  to  a  far  different  and  opposite  party  in  the
Church.  But  the  name  "  Sadducee  "  is  involved  in  quite  as
much  obscurity  as  the  origin  of  the  party  Let  us  try  to
cast  some  fresh  light  upon  both — only  premising  that  the
common  derivations  of  their  name,  whether  from  the  high-
priest  Zadok,  or  from  a  Rabbi  called  Zadok,  whose  funda-
mental principle  of  not  seeking  reward  in  religion  they  were
thought  to  have  misunderstood  and  misapplied,  or  from  the
Hebrew  word  "  zaddikim  " — the  righteous — are  all  unsatis-
factory, and  yet  may  all  contain  elements  of  truth.

There  can  be  no  question  that  the  "sect "  of  the  Sadducees
originated  in  a  reaction  against  the  Pharisees.  If  the  latter
added  to  the  law  their  own  glosses,  interpretations,  and  tra-
ditions, the  Sadducee  took  his  stand  upon  the  bare  letter  of
the  law.  He  would  have  none  of  their  additions  and  supere-
rogations ;  he  would  not  be  righteous  overmuch.  Suffice  it
for  him  to  have  to  practise  "  zedakah,"  "  righteousness."  We
can  understand  how  this  shibboleth  of  theirs  became,  in  the
mouth  of  the  people,  the  byname  of  a  party — some  using  it


Relation  of  the  Pharisees  to  the  Sadducees,  etc.   243

ironically,  some  approvingly.  By-and-by  the  party  no  doubt
took  as  kindly  to  the  name  as  the  Pharisees  did  to  theirs.
Thus  far,  then,  we  agree  with  those  who  derive  the  title  of
Sadducees  from  "  zaddikim."  But  why  the  grammatically-
unaccountable  change  from  "  zaddikim  "  to  "  zaddukim  ? "
May  it  not  be  that  the  simple  but  significant  alteration  of  a
letter  had,  after  a  not  uncommon  fashion,  originated  with
their  opponents,  as  if  they  would  have  said  :  "  You  are
4  zaddikim  ? '  Nay,  rather,  '  zaddukim ' "  from  the  Aramaean
word  "  zadu  "  (wasting  or  desolation) — meaning,  you  are  not
upholders  but  destroyers  of  righteousness  ?  This  origin  of
the  name  would  in  no  way  be  inconsistent  with  the  later
attempts  of  the  party  to  trace  up  their  history  either  to  the
high -priest  Zadok,  or  to  one  of  the  fathers  of  Jewish  tra-
ditionalism, whose  motto  they  ostentatiously  adopted.  History
records  not  a  few  similar  instances  of  attempts  to  trace
up  the  origin  of  a  religious  party.  Be  this  as  it  may,  we  can
understand  how  the  adherents  of  Sadducean  opinions  be-
longed chiefly  to  the  rich,  luxurious,  and  aristocratic  party,
including  the  wealthy  families  of  priests  ;  while,  according  to
the  testimony  of  Josephus,  which  is  corroborated  by  the  New
Testament,  the  mass  of  the  people,  and  especially  the  women,
venerated  and  supported  the  Pharisaical  party.  Thus  the
*  order  "  of  the  "  Chaberim  "  gradually  became  a  popular
party,  like  the  Ultramontanes.  Finally,  as  from  the  nature
of  it  Pharisaism  was  dependent  upon  traditional  lore,  it
became  not  only  the  prevailing  direction  of  Jewish  theological
study,  but  the  "  Chaber "  by-and-by  merged  into  the  Rabbi,
the  "sage,"  or  "disciple  of  the  sages;"  while  the  non-
"chaber,"  or  "am  ha-aretz,"  became  the  designation  for
ignorance  of  traditional  lore,  and  neglect  of  its  ordinances.


244  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

This  was  specially  the  case  when  the  dissolution  of  the  Jewish
commonwealth  rendered  the  obligations  of  the  "  fraternity "
necessarily  impossible.  Under  such  altered  circumstances  the
old  historical  Pharisee  would  often  be  no  small  plague  to  the
leaders  of  the  party,  as  is  frequently  the  case  with  the  original
adherents  and  sticklers  of  a  sect  in  which  the  irresistible
progress  of  time  has  necessarily  produced  changes.

The  course  of  our  investigations  has  shown,  that  neither
Pharisees  nor  Sadducees  were  a  sect,  in  the  sense  of  sepa-
rating from  Temple  or  Synagogue ;  and  also  that  the  Jewish
people  as  such  were  not  divided  between  Pharisees  and
Sadducees.  The  small  number  of  professed  Pharisees  (six
thousand)  at  the  time  of  Herod,  the  representations  of  the
New  Testament,  and  even  the  curious  circumstance  that  Philo
never  once  mentions  the  name  of  Pharisee,  confirm  the  result  of
our  historical  inquiries,  that  the  Pharisees  were  first  an  "  order,"
then  gave  the  name  to  a  party,  and  finally  represented  a  direc-
tion of  theological  thought.  The  New  Testament  speaks  of  no
other  than  these  two  parties.  But  Josephus  and  Philo  also
mention  the  "  Essenes."  It  is  beyond  our  present  scope  either
to  describe  their  tenets  and  practices,  or  even  to  discuss  the
complex  question  of  the  origin  of  their  name.  From  the
nature  of  it,  the  party  exercised  no  great  influence,  and  was
but  short-lived.  They  seem  to  have  combined  a  kind  of
higher  grade  Pharisaism  with  devotional  views,  and  even
practices,  derived  from  Eastern  mysticism,  and  more  par-
ticularly from  the  Medo-Persian  religion.  Of  the  former,  the
fact  that  the  one  object  of  all  their  institutions  was  a  higher
purity,  may  here  be  regarded  as  sufficient  evidence.  The
latter  is  apparent  from  a  careful  study  of  their  views,  as  these
have  been  preserved  to  us,  and  from  their  comparison  with


Relation  of  the  Pharisees  to  the  Sadducees^  etc.   245

the  Zoroastrian  system.  And  of  the  fact  that  "Palestine
was  surrounded  by  Persian  influences,"  there  are  abundant
indications.1

As  a  sect  the  Essenes  never  attained  a  larger  number  than
four  thousand  ;  and  as  they  lived  apart  from  the  rest,  neither
mingling  in  their  society  nor  in  their  worship,  and — as  a
general  rule — abstained  from  marriage,  they  soon  became
extinct.  Indeed,  Rabbinical  writings  allude  to  quite  a
number  of  what  may  probably  be  described  as  sectaries,  all
of  them  more  or  less  distinctly  belonging  to  the  mystical  and
ascetic  branch  of  Pharisaism.  We  here  name,  first,  the
"Vathikin,"  or  "strong  ones,"  who  performed  their  prayers
with  the  first  dawn ;  secondly,  the  "  Toble  Shachrith,"  or
"  morning  baptists,"  who  immersed  before  morning  prayer,  so
as  to  utter  the  Divine  Name  only  in  a  state  of  purity  ;  thirdly,
the  "  Kehala  Kadisha,"  or  "  holy  congregation,"  who  spent  a
third  of  the  day  in  prayer,  a  third  in  study,  and  a  third  in
labour  ;  fourthly,  the  "  Banaim,"  or  "  builders,"  who,  besides
aiming  after  highest  purity,  occupied  themselves  with  mystical
studies  about  God  and  the  world  ;  fifthly,  the  "  Zenuim,"  or
"secret  pious,"  who  besides  kept  their  views  and  writings
secret;  sixthly,  the  "Nekije  hadaath,"  "men  of  a  pure

1  Canon  Lightfoot,  Comm.  on  Coloss.  p.  151.  The  masterly  discussion  of  Pro-
fessor Lightfoot  on  the  Essenes,  so  full  of  most  solid  learning,  and  so  calm  in  its
judicial  summing  up,  may  be  said  to  have  almost  opened  a  new  era  in  the  study  of
the  sect  of  the  Essenes,  taking  it  beyond  often  wild  speculation  into  the  domain  of
historical  investigation.  It  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  book  either  to  discuss
in  a  scientific  manner  the  distinctive  doctrinal  views  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sad-
ducees,  or  to  enter  on  those  of  the  Essenes.  This  must  be  reserved  for  another
occasion.  But  in  view  of  Professor  Lightfoot's  results  I  may  be  allowed  to  refer,
not  without  satisfaction,  to  the  circumstance  that  I  had  arrived  at  conclusions
somewhat  similar  to  his  in  my  History  of  ihe  Jeivish  Nation.  See  my  treatment
of  the  Essenes  and  abstract  of  the  Kabbalshy  pp.  433-461.


246  Sketches  of  Jeivish  Life.

mind,"  who  were  really  separatists  from  their  brethren ;
seventhly,  the  "  Chashaim,"  or  "  mysterious  ones ; "  and
lastly,  the  "  Assiim,"  "  helpers  "  or  "  healers,"  who  professed
to  possess  the  right  pronunciation  of  the  sacred  Name  of
Jehovah,  with  all  that  this  implied.1

If  in  any  of  the  towns  of  Judaea  one  had  met  the  strange
apparition  of  a  man  dressed  wholly  in  white,  whose  sandals
and  garments  perhaps  bore  signs  of  age — for  they  might  not
be  put  away  till  quite  worn  out — but  who  was  scrupulously
clean,  this  man  was  an  Essene.  The  passers  would  stop  short
and  look  after  him  with  mingled  reverence  and  curiosity.  For
he  was  but  rarely  seen  in  town  or  village — the  community
separating  from  the  rest  of  the  people,  and  inhabiting  desert
places,  specially  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Dead  Sea;  and  the
character  of  the  "order"  for  asceticism  and  self-denial,  as  well
as  for  purity,  was  universally  known.  f' However  strictly  they
observed  the  Sabbath,  it  was  in  their  own  synagogues ;  and
although  they  sent  gifts  to  the  altar,  they  attended  not  the
Temple  nor  offered  sacrifices,  partly  because  they  regarded
their  arrangements  as  not  sufficiently  Levitically  clean,  and
partly  because  they  came  to  consider  their  own  table  an  altar,
and  their  common  meals  a  sacrifice.  They  formed  an  "order,"
bound  by  the  strictest  vows,  taken  under  terrible  oaths,  and
subject  to  the  most  rigorous  discipline.  The  members
abstained  from  wine,  meat,  and  oil,  and  most  of  them  also
from  marriage.  They  had  community  of  goods  ;  were  bound
to  poverty,  chastity,  and  obedience  to  their  superiors.  Purity
of  morals  was  enjoined,  especially  in  regard  to  speaking  the

1  Compare  Hamburger  Real-Enc.  fur  Bibel  u.  Talmud,  vol.  ii.  p.  173.  Hege-
sippus  (in  Eus.  H.  E.  ii. )  speaks  of  seven  Hebrew  sects ;  but  his  information  is
evidently  second-hand.


Relation  of  the  Pharisees  to  the  Sadducees,  etc.     247

truth.  To  take  an  oath  was  prohibited,  as  also  the  keeping  of
slaves.  The  order  consisted  of  four  grades  ;  contact  with  one
of  a  lower  always  defiling  him  of  the  higher  grade.  The
novitiate  lasted  two  years,  though  at  the  end  of  the  first  the
candidate  was  taken  into  closer  fellowship.  The  rule  was  in
the  hands  of  "  elders,"  who  had  the  power  of  admission  and
expulsion — the  latter  being  almost  equivalent  to  death  by
starvation,  as  the  Essene  had  bound  himself  by  a  terrible
oath  not  to  associate  with  others.  Their  day  began  with
sunrise,  when  they  went  to  prayer.  Before  that,  nothing
secular  might  be  spoken.  After  prayer,  they  betook  them-
selves to  agricultural  labour — for  they  were  not  allowed  to
keep  herds  and  flocks— or  else  to  works  of  charity,  specially
the  healing  of  the  sick.  At  eleven  o'clock  they  bathed,
changed  their  dress,  and  then  gathered  for  the  common
meal.  A  priest  opened  and  closed  it  with  prayer.  They
sat  according  to  age  and  dignity ;  the  eldest  engaging  in
serious  conversation,  but  in  so  quiet  a  tone  as  not  to  be  heard
outside.  The  young  men  served.  Each  had  bread  and  salt
handed  him,  also  another  dish ;  the  elders  being  allowed  the
condiment  of  hyssop  and  the  luxury  of  warm  water.  After
the  meal  they  put  off  their  clothes,  and  returned  to  work  till
the  evening,  when  there  was  another  common  meal,  followed
by  mystical  hymns  and  dances,  to  symbolise  the  rapt,  ecstatic
state  of  mind.

It  is  needless  to  follow  the  subject  farther.  Even  what  has
been  said — irrespective  of  their  separation  from  the  world,
their  punctilious  Sabbath-observance,  and  views  on  purifica-
tion ;  their  opposition  to  sacrifices,  and  notably  their  rejection
of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection — is  surely  sufficient  to  prove
that  they  had  no  connection  with  the  origin  of  Christianity.


248  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Assertions  of  this  kind  are  equally  astonishing  to  the  calm
historical  student  and  painful  to  the  Christian.  Yet  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  among  these  mystical  sects  were  preserved
views  of  the  Divine  Being,  of  the  Messiah  and  His  kingdom,
and  of  kindred  doctrines,  which  afterwards  appeared  in  the
so-called  "  secret  tradition  "  of  the  Synagogue,  and  which,  as
derived  from  the  study  of  the  prophetic  writings,  contain
marvellous  echoes  of  Christian  truth.  On  this  point,  however,
we  may  not  here  enter.

Christ  and  the  Gospel  among  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  and
Essenes !     We  can  now  realise  the  scene,  and  understand  the
mutual   relations.     The  existing  communities,  the  religious
tendencies,  the  spirit  of  the  age,  assuredly  offered  no  point  of
attachment — only  absolute  and  essential  contrariety  to  the
kingdom  of  heaven.    The  "  preparer  of  the  way"  could  appeal
to  neither  of  them  ;  his  voice  only  cried  "  in  the  wilderness."
Far,   far  beyond   the   origin   of   Pharisees,    Sadducees,   and
Essenes,  he  had  to  point  back  to  the  original  Paschal  conse-
cration of  Israel  as  that  which  was  to  be  now  exhibited  in  its
reality :  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the
sin  of  the  world."     If  the  first  great  miracle  of  Christianity
was  the  breaking  down  of  the  middle  wall  of  partition,  the
second — perhaps  we  should  have  rather  put  it  first,  to  realise
the  symbolism  of  the  two  miracles  in  Cana — was  that  it  found
nothing    analogous   in   the    religious    communities    around,
nothing  sympathetic,  absolutely  no  stem  on  which  to  graft
the  new  plant,  but  was  literally  "  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry
ground,"  of  which  alike  Pharisee,  Sadducee,  and  Essene  would
say :  "  He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness ;  and  when  we  shall
see  Him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  Him."


CHAPTER    XVI.

SYNAGOGUES  :  THEIR  ORIGIN,   STRUCTURE,   AND  OUTWARU
ARRANGEMENTS.

IT  was  a  beautiful  saying  of  Rabbi  Jochanan  (Jer.  Ber.  v.  i),
that  he  who  prays  in  his  house  surrounds  and  fortifies
it,  so  to  speak,  with  a  wall  of  iron.     Nevertheless,  it  seems
immediately  contradicted  by  what  follows.    For  it  is  explained
that  this  only  holds  good  where  a  man  is  alone,   but  that
where  there  is  a  community  prayer  should  be  offered  in  the
synagogue.      We    can    readily   understand    how,   after    the
destruction  of  the  Temple,  and  the  cessation  of  its  symbolical
worship,  the  excessive  value  attached  to  mere  attendance  at
the  synagogue  would  rapidly  grow  in  public  estimation,  till
it  exceeded  all  bounds  of  moderation  or  reason.     Thus,  such
Scriptural  sayings  as  Isa.  Ixvi.  20 ;    Iv.  6,  and  Ps.  Ixxxii.  I
were  applied  to  it.     The  Babylon  Talmud  goes  even  farther.
There  we  are  told  (Ber.  6  a),  that  the  prayer  which  a  man
addresses  to  God  has  only  its  proper  effect  if  offered  in  the
synagogue  ;    that  if  an   individual,  accustomed   to  frequent
every  day  the  synagogue,  misses  it  for  once,  God  will  demand
an  account  of  him  ;  that  if  the  Eternal  finds  fewer  than  ten
persons  there  gathered,  His  anger  is  kindled,  as  it  is  written


250  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

in  Isa.  1.  2  (Ber.  6  b) ;  that  if  a  person  has  a  synagogue  in  his
own  town,  and  does  not  enter  it  for  prayer,  he  is  to  be  called
an  evil  neighbour,  and  provokes  exile  alike  upon  himself  and
his  children,  as  it  is  written  in  Jer.  xii.  4 ;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  the  practice  of  early  resorting  to  the  synagogue  would
account  for  the  longevity  of  people  (Ber.  8  a).  Putting  aside
these  extravagances,  there  cannot,  however,  be  doubt  that,
long  before  the  Talmudical  period,  the  institution  of  syna-
gogues had  spread,  not  only  among  the  Palestinian,  but
among  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion,  and  that  it  was  felt  a
growing  necessity,  alike  from  internal  and  external  causes.

Readers  of  the  New  Testament  know,  that  at  the  time  of  our
Lord  synagogues  were  dotted  all  over  the  land  ;  that  in  them
"from  of  old  "  Moses  had  been  read  (Acts  xv.  21)  ;  that  they
were  under  the  rule  of  certain  authorities,  who  also  exercised
discipline  ;  that  the  services  were  definitely  regulated,  although
considerable  liberty  obtained,  and  that  part  of  them  con-
sisted in  reading  the  prophets,  which  was  generally  followed
by  an  "  exhortation "  (Acts  xiii.  1 5)  or  an  address  (Luke  iv.
17).  The  word  "synagogue"  is,  of  course,  of  Greek  deriva-
tion, and  means  "  gathering  together  " — for  religious  purposes.
The  corresponding  Rabbinical  terms,  "  chenisah,"  "  cheneseth,"
etc.,  "zibbur,"  "vaad,"  and  "  kahal,"  may  be  generally
characterised  as  equivalents.  But  it  is  interesting  to  notice,
that  both  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Rabbis  have  shades  of
distinction,  well  known  in  modern  theological  discussions.
To  begin  with  the  former.  Two  terms  are  used  for  Israel  as
a  congregation  :  "  edah  "  and  "  kahal ;  "  of  which  the  former
seems  to  refer  to  Israel  chiefly  in  their  outward  organisation  as
a  congregation — what  moderns  would  call  the  visible  Church
— while  "  kahal  "  rather  indicates  their  inner  or  spiritual  con-


Synagogues:  their  Origin,  Structure,  etc.      251

nection.  Even  the  LXX.  seem  to  have  seen  this  distinction.
The  word  "  edah  "  occurs  one  hundred  and  thirty  times,  and  is
always  rendered  in  the  LXX.  by  "  synagogue,"  never  by
"  ecclesia  "  (church) ;  while  "  kahal "  is  translated  in  seventy
places  by  "  ecclesia,"  and  only  in  thirty-seven  by  "  synagogue."
Similarly,  the  Mishnah  employs  the  term  "  kahal "  only  to
denote  Israel  as  a  whole ;  while  the  term  "  zibbur,"  for
example,  is  used  alike  for  churches  and  for  the  Church — that
is,  for  individual  congregations,  and  for  Israel  as  a  whole.

The  origin  of  the  synagogue  is  lost  in  the  obscurity  of  tra-
dition. Of  course,  like  so  many  other  institutions,  it  is  traced
by  the  Rabbis  to  the  patriarchs.  Thus,  both  the  Targum
Jonathan  and  the  Jerusalem  Targum  represent  Jacob  as  an
attendant  in  the  synagogue,  and  Rebekah  as  resorting  thither
for  advice  when  feeling  within  her  the  unnatural  contest  of
her  two  sons.  There  can  be  no  occasion  for  seriously  dis-
cussing such  statements.  For  when  in  2  Kings  xxii.  8  we
read  that  "  the  book  of  the  law  "  was  discovered  by  Shaphan
the  scribe  in  "  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  this  implies  that  dur-
ing the  reign  of  King  Josiah  there  could  have  been  no  syna-
gogues in  the  land,  since  it  was  their  main  object  to  secure  the
weekly  reading,  and  of  course  the  preservation,  of  the  books
of  Moses  (Acts  xv.  21).  Our  Authorised  Version,  indeed,
renders  Ps.  Ixxiv.  8,  "  They  have  burned  up  all  the  syna-
gogues of  God  in  the  land."  But  there  is  good  authority  for
questioning  this  translation ;  and,  even  if  admitted,  it  would
not  settle  the  question  of  the  exact  time  when  synagogues
originated.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  not  a  hint  of  syna-
gogue-worship either  in  the  law  or  the  prophets  ;  and  this  of
itself  would  be  decisive,  considering  the  importance  of  the
subject.  Besides,  it  may  be  said  that  there  was  no  room  for


252  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

such  meetings  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.  There
the  whole  worship  was  typical — the  sacrificial  services  alike
constituting  the  manner  in  which  Israel  approached  unto  God,
and  being  the  way  by  which  He  communicated  blessings  to
His  people.  Gatherings  for  prayer  and  for  fellowship  with
the  Father  belong,  so  far  as  the  Church  as  a  whole  is  con-
cerned, to  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  quite  in
accordance  with  this  general  principle,  that  when  men  filled
with  the  Spirit  of  God  were  raised  up  from  time  to  time,  those
who  longed  for  deeper  knowledge  and  closer  converse  with
the  Lord  should  have  gathered  around  them  on  Sabbaths  and
new  moons,  as  the  pious  Shunammite  resorted  to  Elisha
(2  Kings  iv.  23),  and  as  others  were  no  doubt  wont  to  do,  if
within  reach  of  "  prophets "  or  their  disciples.  But  quite  a
different  state  of  matters  ensued  during  the  Babylonish
captivity.  Deprived  of  the  Temple  services,  some  kind  of
religious  meetings  would  become  an  absolute  necessity,  if  the
people  were  not  to  lapse  into  practical  heathenism — a  danger,
indeed,  which,  despite  the  admonitions  of  the  prophets,
and  the  prospect  of  deliverance  held  out,  was  not  quite
avoided.  For  the  preservation,  also,  of  the  national  bond
which  connected  Israel,  as  well  as  for  their  continued  religious
existence,  the  institution  of  synagogues  seemed  alike  needful
and  desirable.  In  point  of  fact,  the  attentive  reader  of  the
books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  will  discover  in  the  period  after
the  return  from  Babylon  the  beginnings  of  the  synagogue.
Only  quite  rudimentary  as  yet,  and  chiefly  for  the  purposes
of  instructing  those  who  had  come  back  ignorant  and  semi-
heathenish — still,  they  formed  a  starting-point.  Then  came
the  time  of  terrible  Syrian  oppression  and  persecutions,  and
of  the  Maccabean  rising.  We  can  understand,  how  under


Synagogues:  their  Origin,  Striicture,  etc.      253

such  circumstances  the  institution  of  the  synagogue  would
develop,  and  gradually  assume  the  proportions  and  the
meaning  which  it  afterwards  attained.  For  it  must  be  borne
in  mind,  that,  in  proportion  as  the  spiritual  import  of  the
Temple  services  was  lost  to  view,  and  Judaism  became  a
matter  of  outward  ordinances,  nice  distinctions,  and  logical
discussion,  the  synagogue  would  grow  in  importance.  And
so  it  came  to  pass,  that  at  the  time  of  Christ  there  was  not
a  foreign  settlement  of  Jews  without  one  or  more  synagogues
• — that  of  Alexandria,  of  which  both  the  Talmuds  speak
in  such  exaggerated  language,  being  specially  gorgeous —
while  throughout  Palestine  they  were  thickly  planted.  It
is  to  these  latter  only  that  we  can  for  the  present  direct
attention.

Not  a  town,  nor  a  village,  if  it  numbered  only  ten  men,  who
could  or  would  wholly  give  themselves  to  Divine  things,1  but
had  one  or  more  synagogues.  If  it  be  asked,  why  the  number
ten  was  thus  fixed  upon  as  the  smallest  that  could  form  a
congregation,  the  reply  is  that,  according  to  Num.  xiv.  27,
the  "  evil  congregation "  consisted  of  the  spies  who  had
brought  a  bad  report,  and  whose  number  was  ten — after
deducting,  of  course,  Joshua  and  Caleb.  Larger  cities  had
several,  some  of  them  many,  synagogues.  From  Acts  vi.  9
we  know  that  such  was  the  case  in  Jerusalem,  tradition  having
also  left  us  an  account  of  the  synagogue  of  "the  Alexan-
drians," to  which  class  of  Jews  Stephen  may  have  belonged
by  birth  or  education,  on  which  ground  also  he  would  chiefly
address  himself  to  them.  The  Rabbis  have  it  that,  at  the
time  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  that  city  had  not  fewer

1  The  so-called  "  Batlanim."  The  exact  meaning  of  the  term  has  given  rise
to  much  learned  discussion.


254  SketcJies  of  Jewish  Life.

than  480,  or  at  least  460,  synagogues.  Unless  the  number
480  was  fixed  upon  simply  as  the  multiple  of  symbolical
numbers  (4X  icx  12),  or  with  a  kindred  mystical  purpose  in
view,  it  would,  of  course,  be  a  gross  exaggeration.  But,  as  a
stranger  entered  a  town  or  village,  it  could  never  be  difficult
to  find  out  the  synagogue.  If  it  had  not,  like  our  churches,  its
spire,  pointing  men,  as  it  were,  heavenward,  the  highest  ground
in  the  place  was  at  least  selected  for  it,  to  symbolise  that  its
engagements  overtopped  all  things  else,  and  in  remembrance
of  the  prophetic  saying,  that  the  Lord's  house  should  "be
established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains,"  and  "  exalted  above
the  hills"  (Isa.  ii.  2).  If  such  a  situation  could  not  be  se-
cured, it  was  sought  to  place  it  "  in  the  corners  of  streets,"
or  at  the  entrance  to  the  chief  squares,  according  to  what
was  regarded  as  a  significant  direction  in  Prov.  i.  21.  Pos-
sibly our  Lord  may  have  had  this  also  in  view  when  He
spoke  of  those  who  loved  "to  pray  standing  in  the  syna-
gogues and  in  the  corners  of  the  streets"  (Matt.  vi.  5),  it
being  a  very  common  practice  at  the  time  to  offer  prayer
on  entering  a  synagogue.  But  if  no  prominent  site  could
be  obtained,  a  pole  should  at  least  be  attached  to  the  roof,
to  reach  up  beyond  the  highest  house.  A  city  whose  syna-
gogue was  lower  than  the  other  dwellings  was  regarded
as  in  danger  of  destruction.

Of  the  architecture  of  ordinary  synagogues,  not  only  the
oldest  still  in  existence,  but  the  recent  excavations  in  Palestine,
enable  us  to  form  a  correct  idea.  Internally  they  were  simply
rectangular  or  round  buildings,  with  a  single  or  double
colonnade,  and  more  or  less  adorned  by  carvings.  Externally
they  had  generally  some  sacred  symbol  carved  on  the  lintels
— commonly  the  seven-branched  candlestick,  or  perhaps  th*


Synagogues:  their  Origin,  Structure,  etc.      255

pot  of  manna.1  There  is  one  remarkable  instance  of  the
use  of  the  latter  emblem,  too  important  to  be  passed  over.3
In  Capernaum,  our  Lord's  "own  city"  (Matthew  ix.  i),
there  was  but  one  synagogue — that  built  at  the  cost  of  the
pious  centurion.  For,  although  our  Authorised  Version
renders  the  commendation  of  the  Jewish  elders,  "  He  loveth
our  nation,  and  has  built  us  a  synagogue "  (Luke  vii.  5),
in  the  original  the  article  is  definite :  "  he  hath  built  us
the  synagogue" — just  as  in  a  similar  manner  we  infer  that
Nazareth  had  only  one  synagogue  (Matt.  xiii.  54).  The  site
of  the  ancient  Capernaum  had  till  comparatively  recently
been  unknown.  But  its  identification  with  the  modern  Tell
Hum  is  now  so  satisfactory,  that  few  would  care  to  question
it.  What  is  even  more  interesting,  the  very  ruins  of  that
synagogue  which  the  good  centurion  built  have  been
brought  to  light ;  and,  as  if  to  make  doubt  impossible,
its  architecture  is  evidently  that  of  the  Herodian  period.
And  here  comes  in  the  incidental  but  complete  confirma-
tion of  the  gospel  narrative.  We  remember  how,  before,
the  Lord  Jesus  had  by  His  word  of  blessing  multiplied
the  scanty  provision,  brought,  it  might  be  accidentally,  by

1  "  Of  the  tabernacle  in  which  the  ark  rested  at  Shiloh,  from  the  time  of  Joshua
to  that  of  Samuel,  no  trace,  of  course,  remains.     But  on  the  summit  of  a  little
knoll  we  find  the  remains  of  what  was  once  a  Jewish  synagogue,  afterwards  used
as  a  church,  and  subsequently  as  a  mosque.     On  the  lintel  over  the  doorway,
between  two  wreaths  of  flowers,  is  carved  a  vessel,  shaped  like  a  Roman  amphora.
It  so  closely  resembles  the  conventional  type  of  the  'pot  of  manna,'  as  found
on  coins  and  in  the  ruins  of  the  synagogue  at  Capernaum,  that  it  doubtless  formed
part  of  the  original  building.     It  is  a  not  improbable  conjecture  that  the  syna-
gogue may  have  been  erected  on  the  sacred  spot  which  for  so  many  generations
formed  the  centre  of  Jewish  worship." — Those  Holy  Fields.

2  Pointed  out  by   Canon   Williams,   the  learned   author   of    The  Holy    City.
See   The  Bible,  as  Illustrated  by  Modei-n  Science  and  Travel;  Papers  read  be/on
the  Church  Congress  at  Dublin  (1868),  pp.  31,  32.


256  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

a  lad  in  the  company  of  those  five  thousand  who  had
thronged  to  hear  Him,  so  that  there  was  not  only  sufficient  for
their  wants,  but  enough  for  each  of  the  twelve  apostles  to  fill
his  basket  with  the  fragments  of  what  the  Saviour  had  dis-
pensed. That  day  of  miraculous  provision  had  been  followed
by  a  night  of  equally  wondrous  deliverance.  His  disciples
were  crossing  the  lake,  now  tossed  by  one  of  those  sudden
storms  which  so  frequently  sweep  down  upon  it  from  the
mountains.  All  at  once,  in  their  perplexity,  it  was  the
Master  Whom  they  saw,  walking  on  the  sea,  and  nearing  the
ship.  As  the  light  of  the  moon  fell  upon  that  well-known
form,  and,  as  He  drew  nigh,  cast  His  shadow  in  increasing
proportions  upon  the  waters  which,  obedient,  bore  His  feet,
they  feared.  It  was  a  marvellous  vision — too  marvellous
almost  to  believe  it  a  reality,  and  too  awful  to  bear  it,  if
a  reality.  And  so  they  seem  to  have  hesitated  about  receiv-
ing Him  into  the  ship.1  But  His  presence  and  voice  soon
reassured  them,  and  "immediately  the  ship  was  at  the
land."  That  "  land  "  was  the  seashore  of  Capernaum.  The
next  morning  broke  with  the  usual  calm  and  beauty  of
spring  on  the  lake.  Presently  white  sails  were  spreading
over  its  tranquil  waters  ;  marking  the  approach  of  many  from
the  other  side,  who,  missing  "  the  Prophet,"  Whom,  with  the
characteristic  enthusiasm  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  district,
they  would  fain  have  made  a  king,  now  followed  Him  across
the  water.  There  could  be  no  difficulty  in  "  finding  Him "
in  "  His  own  city,"  the  home  of  Peter  and  Andrew  (Mark  i.
21,  29).  But  no  ordinary  dwelling  would  have  held  such  a
concourse  as  now  thronged  around  Him.  So,  we  imagine,  the

1  Such,  at  least,  is  the  impression  conveyed  to  my  mind  by  John  vi.  21,  as  com-
pared with  ven*.  19  and  20,


Synagogues:  their  Origin,  Structure,  etc.      257

multitude  made  their  way  towards  the  synagogue.  On  the
road,  we  suppose,  the  question  and  answers  passed,  of  which
we  have  an  account  in  John  vi.  25-28.  They  had  now
reached  the  entrance  to  the  synagogue  ;  and  the  following
discourse  was  pronounced  by  the  Lord  in  the  synagogue
itself,  as  we  are  expressly  told  in  ver.  59  :  "  These  things  said
He  in  the  synagogue,  as  He  taught  in  Capernaum."  But
what  is  so  remarkable  is,  that  the  very  lintel  of  this  syna-
gogue has  been  found,  and  that  the  device  upon  it  bears
such  close  reference  to  the  question  which  the  Jews  put
to  Jesus,  that  we  can  almost  imagine  them  pointing  up  to
it,  as  they  entered  the  synagogue,  and  said  :  "  Our  fathers
did  eat  manna  in  the  desert ;  as  it  is  written,  He  gave  them
bread  from  heaven  to  eat "  (John  vi.  3.1).  For,  in  the
words  of  Canon  Williams,  "The  lintel  lying  among  the
ruins  of  the  good  centurion's  synagogue  at  Capernaum
has  carved  on  it  the  device  of  the  pot  of  manna.  What  is
further  remarkable,  this  lintel  is  ornamented  besides  with
a  flowing  pattern  of  vine  leaves  and  clusters  of  grapes,
another  emblem  of  the  mystery  of  which  our  Lord  dis-
coursed so  largely  in  this  synagogue."

Before  parting  from  this  most  interesting  subject,  we
may  place  beside  the  Master,  as  it  were,  the  two  repre-
sentatives of  His  Church,  a  Gentile  and  a  Jew,  both
connected  with  this  synagogue.  Of  its  builder,  the  good
centurion,  Canon  Williams  thus  writes :  "  In  what  spirit
the  large-hearted  Roman  soldier  had  made  his  offering,
the  rich  and  elaborate  carvings  of  cornices  and  entablatures,
of  columns  and  capitals,  and  niches,  still  attest."  As  for  the
ruler  of  that  same  synagogue,  we  know  that  it  was  Jairus,
whose  cry  of  anguish  and  of  faith  brought  Jesus  to  his  house

S


258  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

to  speak  the  life-giving  "Talitha  cumi"  over  the  one  only
daughter,  just  bursting  into  womanhood,  who  lay  dead  in  that
chamber,  while  the  crowd  outside  and  the  hired  minstrels
made  shrill,  discordant  mourning.

Thus  far  as  to  the  external  appearance  of  synagogues.
Their  internal  arrangement  appears  to  have  been  originally
upon  the  plan  of  the  Temple,  or,  perhaps,  even  of  the  Taber-
nacle. At  least,  the  oldest  still  standing  synagogue,  that  of
the  Cyrenian  Jews,  in  the  island  of  Gerbe,  is,  according  to  the
description  of  a  missionary,  Dr.  Ewald,  tripartite,  after  the
model  of  the  Court,  the  Holy,  and  the  Most  Holy  Place.  And
in  all  synagogues  the  body  of  the  building,  with  the  space
around,  set  apart  for  women,  represents  the  Court  of  the
Women,  while  the  innermost  and  highest  place,  with  the
Ark  behind,  containing  the  rolls  of  the  law,  represents  the
sanctuary  itself.  In  turn  the  synagogue  seems  to  have  been
adopted  as  the  model  for  the  earliest  Christian  churches.
Hence  not  only  the  structure  of  the  "  basilica,"  but  the  very
term  "  bema,"  is  incorporated  in  Rabbinical  language.1  This
is  only  what  might  have  been  expected,  considering  that  the
earliest  Christians  were  Jews  by  nationality,  and  that  heathen-
ism could  offer  no  type  for  Christian  worship.  To  return.  As
concerned  the  worshippers,  it  was  deemed  wrong  to  pray
behind  a  synagogue  without  turning  the  face  to  it ;  and  a
story  is  told  (Ber.  6  b)  of  Elijah  appearing  in  the  form  of  an
Arab  merchant,  and  punishing  one  guilty  of  this  sin.  "  Thou
standest  before  thy  Master  as  if  there  were  two  Powers  [or
Gods],"  said  the  seeming  Arab ;  and  with  these  words  "  he
drew  his  sword  and  killed  him."  A  still  more  curious  idea
prevailed,  that  it  was  requisite  to  advance  the  length  of  at

1  ^is  subject  is  fully  discussed  in  Vitringa,  Synag.  pp.  444-456.


Synagogues:  their  Origin,  Struct^lre,  etc.      259

least  "two  doors"  within  a  synagogue  before  settling  to
prayer,  which  was  justified  by  a  reference  to  Prov.  viii.  34
(Ber.  8  a).  The  inference  is  peculiar,  but  not  more  so,  per-
haps, than  those  of  some  modern  critics,  and  certainly  not
more  strange  than  that  of  the  Talmud  itself,  which,  on  a
preceding  page,  when  discussing  the  precise  duration  of  the
wrath  of  the  Almighty,  concludes  that  Balaam  had  been
the  only  person  who  knew  it  exactly,  since  it  is  written  of
him  (Numb.  xxiv.  1 6),  that  he  "  knew  the  thoughts  of  the
Most  High ! "  Another  direction  of  the  Talmud  was  to
leave  the  synagogue  with  slow  steps,  but  to  hasten  to  it  as
rapidly  as  possible,  since  it  was  written  (Hos.  vi.  3,  as  the
Rabbis  arranged  the  verse),  "  Let  us  pursue  to  know  the
Lord."  Rabbi  Seira  tells  us  how,  at  one  time,  he  had  been
scandalised  by  seeing  the  Rabbis  running  on  the  Sabbath
—when  bodily  rest  was  enjoined — to  attend  a  sermon  ;  but
that,  when  he  understood  how  Hos.  xi.  10  applied  to  the
teaching  of  the  Halachah,  he  himself  joined  in  their  race.
And  so  Rabbi  Seira,  as  it  seems  to  us,  somewhat  caustically
concludes :  "  The  reward  of  a  discourse  is  the  haste "  with
which  people  run  to  it — no  matter,  it  would  appear,  whether
they  get  in  to  hear  it,  or  whether  there  is  anything  in  the
discourse  worth  the  hearing.

As  a  rule,  synagogues  were  built  at  the  expense  of  the
congregation,  though  perhaps  assisted  by  richer  neighbours.
Sometimes,  as  we  know,  they  were  erected  at  the  cost  of
private  individuals,  which  was  supposed  to  involve  special
merit.  In  other  cases,  more  particularly  when  the  number  of
Jews  was  small,  a  large  room  in  a  private  house  was  set  apart
for  the  purpose.  This  also  passed  into  the  early  Church,  as
we  gather  from  Acts  ii.  46 ;  v.  42.  Accordingly  we  under*


260  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

stand  the  apostolic  expression,  "  Church  in  the  house  "  (Rom.
xv>i-  3>  5  J  l  Cor.  xvi.  19;  Col.  iv.  15;  Philemon  2),  as  implying
that  in  all  these  and  other  instances  a  room  in  a  private  house
had  been  set  apart,  in  which  the  Christians  regularly  assembled
for  their  worship.  Synagogues  were  consecrated  by  prayer,
although,  even  thus,  the  ceremony  was  not  deemed  completed
till  after  the  ordinary  prayers  had  been  offered  by  some
one,  though  it  were  a  passing  stranger.  Rules  of  decorum,
analogous  to  those  enforced  in  the  Temple,  were  enjoined  on
those  who  attended  the  synagogue.  Decency  and  cleanliness
in  dress,  quietness  and  reverence  in  demeanour,  are  prescribed
with  almost  wearisome  details  and  distinctions.  Money  collec-
tions were  only  to  be  made  for  the  poor  or  for  the  redemption
of  captives.  If  the  building  were  in  a  dangerous  condition,
the  synagogue  might  be  broken  down,  provided  another  were
built  as  rapidly  as  possible  in  its  place.  But  even  so,  the
sanctity  of  the  place  remained,  and  synagogue-ruins  might
not  be  converted  into  mourning  places,  nor  used  as  thorough-
fares, nor  might  ropes  be  hung  up  in  them,  nor  nets  spread,
nor  fruits  laid  out  for  drying.  The  principle  of  sanctity
applied,  of  course,  to  all  analogous  uses  to  which  such  ruins
might  have  been  put.  Money  collected  for  building  a
synagogue  might,  if  absolute  necessity  arose,  be  employed
by  the  congregation  for  other  purposes  ;  but  if  stones,  beams,
etc.,  had  been  purchased  for  the  building,  these  could  not  be
resold,  but  were  regarded  as  dedicated.  A  town  synagogue
was  considered  absolutely  inalienable  ;  those  in  villages  might
be  disposed  of  under  the  direction  of  the  local  Sanhedrim,
provided  the  locale  were  not  afterwards  to  be  used  as  a  public
bath,  a  wash-house,  a  tannery,  or  a  pool.  The  money  realised
was  to  be  devoted  to  something  more  sacred  than  the  mere


Synagogues:  their  Origin,  Structure,  etc.      261

stone  and  mortar  of  a  synagogue — say,  the  ark  in  which  the
copies  of  the  law  were  kept.  Different  from  synagogues,
though  devoted  to  kindred  purposes,  were  the  so-called
"  oratories  "  or  "  places  where  prayer  was  wont  to  be  made  "
(Acts  xvi.  13).  These  were  generally  placed  outside  towns
and  in  the  vicinity  of  running  water  or  of  the  sea  (Jos.  Ant.
xiv.  10,  23),  for  the  purpose  of  the  customary  lustrations
connected  with  prayer  (Philo.  ii.  535).

The  separation  of  the  sexes,  which  was  observed  even  in
the  Temple  at  the  time  of  Christ,  was  strictly  carried  out
in  the  synagogues,  such  division  being  made  effectual
by  a  partition,  boarded  off  and  provided  with  gratings,  to
which  there  was  separate  access.  The  practice  seems
simply  in  accordance  with  Eastern  manners  and  modes  of
thinking.  But  the  Rabbis,  who  seek  Scripture  authority
for  every  arrangement,  however  trivial,  find  in  this  case
their  warrant  in  Zech.  xii.  11-14,  where  "the  wives"  are  no
less  than  five  times  spoken  of  as  "apart,"  while  engaged
in  their  prayerful  mourning.  The  synagogue  was  so  placed
that,  on  entering  it,  the  worshippers  would  face  towards
Jerusalem — mere  "  orientation,"  as  it  is  now  called,  having  no
meaning  in  Jewish  worship.  Beyond  the  middle  of  the  syna-
gogue rose  the  platform  or  "  bima,"  as  it  was  anciently,  or
"  almmeor,"  as  it  is  presently  named.  Those  who  were  called
up  to  it  for  reading  ascended  by  the  side  nearest,  and
descended  by  that  most  remote  from  their  seats  in  the
synagogue.  On  this  "bima"  stood  the  pulpit,  or  rather
lectern,  the  "migdal  ez,"  "wooden  tower"  of  Neh.  viii,  4,
whence  the  prescribed  portions  of  the  law  and  of  the  prophets
were  read,  and  addresses  delivered.  The  reader  stood;  the
preacher  sat.  Thus  we  find  (Luke  iv.  20)  that,  after  reading


262  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

a  portion  from  the  prophet  Isaiah,  our  Lord  "closed  the  book,
and  He  gave  it  again  to  the  minister,  and  sat  down,"  before
delivering  His  discourse  in  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth.  Prayer
also  was  offered  standing,  although  in  the  Temple  the  wor-
shippers prostrated  themselves,  a  practice  still  continued  in
certain  of  the  most  solemn  litanies.  The  pulpit  or  lectern—
"migdal"  (tower),  "chisse"  and  "churseja"  (chair  or  throne),
or  "pergulah"  (the  Latin  "pergula,"  probably  elevation) —
stood  in  the  middle  of  the  "  bima,"  and  in  front  of  "  the  ark."
The  latter,  which  occupied  the  innermost  place  in  the  syna-
gogue, as  already  noticed,  corresponded  to  the  Most  Holy
Place  in  the  Temple,  and  formed  the  most  important  part.
It  was  called  the  "aron"  (ark),  the  "tevah,"  or  "tevutha"
(chest,  like  that  in  which  Noah  and  Moses  were  saved),  or  the
"hechal"  (little  temple).  In  reality,  it  consisted  of  a  press
or  chest,  in  which  the  rolls  of  the  law  were  deposited.  This
"ark  "  was  made  movable  {Taan.  ii.  I,  2),  so  as  to  lift  out  on
occasions  of  public  fasting  and  prayer,  in  order  to  have  it
placed  in  the  street  or  market-place  where  the  people  gathered.
Sometimes  there  was  also  a  second  press  for  the  rolls  of  the
prophets,  in  which  the  disused  or  damaged  rolls  of  the  law
were  likewise  deposited.  In  front  of  the  ark  hung  the  "vilon"
("velum,"  veil),  in  imitation  of  that  before  the  Holy  Place.
Above  it  was  suspended  the  "ner  olam,"  or  ever-burning
lamp,  and  near  to  it  stood  the  eight-branched  candlestick,  lit
during  the  eight  days  of  the  feast  of  the  dedication  of  the
Temple  (John  x.  22),  or  Candlemas.  The  practice  of  lighting
candles  and  lamps,  not  merely  for  use,  but  in  honour  of  the
day  or  feast,  is  not  unknown  in  the  synagogues.  Of  course,
in  regard  to  this,  as  to  other  practices,  it  is  impossible  to
determine  what  was  the  exact  custom  at  the  time  of  our


Synagogues :  tJieir  Origin,  Structure,  etc,      263

Lord,  although  the  reader  may  be  able  to  infer  how  much
and  what  special  practices  may  have  been  gradually  intro-
duced. It  would  lead  beyond  our  present  scope  to  describe
the  various  directions  to  be  observed  in  copying  out  the  syna-
gogue-rolls, which  embodied  the  five  books  of  Moses,  or  to
detail  what  would  render  them  unfit  for  use.  No  less  than
twenty  such  causes  are  mentioned  by  the  Rabbis.  At  present
the  vellum,  on  which  the  Pentateuch  is  written,  is  affixed  to
two  rollers,  and  as  each  portion  of  the  law  is  read  it  is  unrolled
from  the  right,  and  rolled  on  to  the  left  roller.  The  roll  itself
was  fastened  together  by  linen  wrappers  or  cloths  ("  mitpa-
choth"),  and  then  placed  in  a  "case"  ("tik,"  the  Greek
"theke").  All  these  articles  are  already  mentioned  in  the
Mishnah.  Later  practices  need  not  here  occupy  our  atten-
tion. Lastly,  it  should  be  noted,  that  at  first  the  people
probably  stood  in  the  synagogues  or  sat  on  the  ground.  But
as  the  services  became  more  protracted,  sitting  accommoda-
tion had  to  be  provided.  The  congregation  sat  facing  the
ark.  On  the  other  hand,  "the  rulers  of  the  synagogue,"
Rabbis,  distinguished  Pharisees,  and  others,  who  sought
honour  of  men,  claimed  "  the  chief  seats,"  which  were  placed
with  their  backs  to  the  ark,  and  facing  the  worshippers.
These  seats,  which  bear  the  same  name  as  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, were  made  objects  of  special  ambition  (Matt,  xxiii.  6),
and  rank,  dignity,  or  seniority  entitled  a  Rabbi  or  other
influential  man  to  priority.  Our  Lord  expressly  refers  to  this
(Matt,  xxiii.  6)  as  one  of  the  characteristic  manifestations  of
Pharisaical  pride.  That  both  the  same  spirit  and  practice
had  crept  into  some  of  the  early  churches,  appears  from  the
warning  of  St.  James  (Jas.  ii.  2,  3)  against  an  un-Christ-
like  "  respect  of  persons,"  which  would  assign  a  place  high


264  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

up  in  "synagogues"  of  Christians  to  the  mere  possession  of
"  goodly  apparel "  or  the  wearing  of  the  "  gold  ring."

Hitherto  we  have  chiefly  described  the  outward  arrange-
ments of  synagogues.  It  will  now  be  necessary,  however
rapidly  in  this  place,  to  sketch  their  various  uses,  their  wor-
ship, and  their  officials,  most  of  which  are  also  referred  to
in  various  parts  of  the  New  Testament.


CHAPTER  XVIL

THE   WORSHIP  OF  THE  SYNAGOGUE.

ONE  of  the  most  difficult  questions  in  Jewish  history  is
that  connected  with  the  existence  of  a  synagogue
within  the  Temple.  That  such  a  "  synagogue  "  existed,  and
that  its  meeting-place  was  in  "  the  hall  of  hewn  stones,"  at
the  south-eastern  angle  of  the  court  of  the  priests,  cannot  be
called  in  question,  in  face  of  the  clear  testimony  of  contem-
porary witnesses.  Considering  that  "  the  hall  of  hewn  stones  "
was  also  the  meeting-place  for  the  great  Sanhedrim,  and  that
not  only  legal  decisions,  but  lectures  and  theological  discus-
sions formed  part  of  their  occupation,  we  might  be  tempted
to  conjecture  that  the  term  "synagogue"  had  been  employed
in  its  wider  sense,  since  such  buildings  were  generally  used
throughout  the  country  for  this  two-fold  purpose  as  well  as
for  worship.  Of  theological  lectures  and  discussions  in  the
Temple,  we  have  an  instance  on  the  occasion  when  our  Lord
was  found  by  His  parents  "  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  doctors,
both  hearing  them,  and  asking  them  questions  "  (Luke  ii.  46).
And  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  that  this  also  explains  how
the  scribes  and  Pharisees  could  so  frequently  "  come  upon
Him,"  while  He  taught  in  the  Temple,  with  their  difficult


266  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

and  entangling  questions,  up  to  that  rejoinder  about  the
nature  of  the  Messiah,  with  which  He  finally  silenced  them  :
"  If  David  then  call  Him  Lord,  how  is  He  his  Son  ?"  (Matt
xxii.  45).  But  in  reference  to  the  so-called  "  Temple-syna-
gogue," there  is  this  difficulty,  that  certain  prayers  and  rites
seem  to  have  been  connected  with  it,  which  formed  no  part
of  the  regular  Temple  services,  and  yet  were  somehow
engrafted  upon  them.  We  can  therefore  only  conclude  that
the  growing  change  in  the  theological  views  of  Israel,  before
and  about  the  time  of  Christ,  made  the  Temple  services  alone
appear  insufficient.  The  symbolical  and  typical  elements
which  constituted  the  life  and  centre  of  Temple  worship  had
lost  their  spiritual  meaning  and  attraction  to  the  majority  of
that  generation,  and  their  place  was  becoming  occupied  by
so-called  teaching  and  outward  performances.  Thus  the
worship  of  the  letter  took  the  place  of  that  of  the  spirit,  and
Israel  was  preparing  to  reject  Christ  for  Pharisaism.  The
synagogue  was  substituted  for  the  Temple,  and  overshadowed
it,  even  within  its  walls,  by  an  incongruous  mixture  of  man-
devised  worship  with  the  God-ordained  typical  rites  of  the
sanctuary.  Thus,  so  far  from  the  "  Temple-synagogue  "  being
the  model  for  those  throughout  the  country,  as  some  writers
maintain,  it  seems  to  us  of  later  origin,  and  to  have  borrowed
many  rites  from  the  country  synagogues,  in  which  the  people
had  become  accustomed  to  them.1

The  subject  has  a  far  deeper  than  merely  historical  interest.
For  the  presence  of  a  synagogue  within  the  Temple,  or
rather,  as  we  prefer  to  put  it,  the  addition  of  synagogue-
worship  to  that  of  the  Temple,  is  sadly  symbolical.  It  is,  so

1  This  is  substantially  admitted  by  Herzfeld,  Gesch.  d.    Voltes  Jisr.  vol.  iii.  pp.


The  Worship  of  the  Synagogue.  267

to  speak,  one  of  those  terribly  significant  utterances  (by  deed),
in  which  Israel,  all  unconsciously,  pronounced  its  own  doom,
just  as  was  this  :  "  His  blood  be  upon  us  and  our  children,"
or  the  cry  for  the  release  of  Barabbas  (the  son  of  the  father),
who  had  been  condemned  "  for  sedition  "  and  "  murder  " — no
doubt  in  connection  with  a  pseudo-Messianic  rising  against
the  Roman  power — instead  of  the  true  Son  of  the  Father,
who  would  indeed  have  "restored  the  kingdom  to  Israel,"
And  yet  there  was  nothing  in  the  worship  itself  of  the
synagogue  which  could  have  prevented  either  the  Lord,  or
His  apostles  and  early  followers,  from  attending  it  till  the
time  of  final  separation  had  come.  Readers  of  the  New
Testament  know  what  precious  opportunities  it  offered  for
making  known  the  Gospel.  Its  services  were,  indeed,  singu-
larly elastic.  For  the  main  object  of  the  synagogue  was  the
teaching  of  the  people.  The  very  idea  of  its  institution,
before  and  at  the  time  of  Ezra,  explains  and  conveys  this,
and  it  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  Josephus  (Ag.  Apion,
ii.  17).  But  perhaps  the  ordinary  reader  of  the  New  Testa-
ment may  have  failed  to  notice,  how  prominently  this  element
in  the  synagogue  is  brought  out  in  the  gospel  history.  Yet
the  word  "  teaching  "  is  used  so  frequently  in  connection  with
our  Lord's  appearance  in  the  synagogue,  that  its  lesson  is
obvious  (see  Matt.  iv.  23  ;  Mark  i.  21 ;  vi.  2  ;  Luke  iv.  15  ;
vi.  6;  xiii.  10 ;  John  vi.  59;  xviii.  20).  The  "teaching"  part
of  the  service  consisted  mainly  in  reading  a  section  from  the
law,  with  which  the  reading  of  a  portion  from  the  prophets,
and  a  sermon,  or  address,  were  conjoined.  Of  course,  the
liturgical  element  could  in  such  services  never  have  been
quite  wanting,  and  it  soon  acquired  considerable  importance.
Tt  consisted  of  prayer  and  the  pronouncing  of  the  Aaronic


268  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

blessing  (Num.  vi.  24-26)  by  priests — that  is,  of  course,  not
by  Rabbis,  who  were  merely  teachers  or  doctors,  but  by  lineal
descendants  of  the  house  of  Aaron.  There  was  no  service
of  "  praise  "  in  the  synagogues.

Public  worship3  commenced  on  ordinary  occasions  with
the  so-called  "  Shema,"  which  was  preceded  in  the  morning
and  evening  by  two  "  benedictions,"  and  succeeded  in  the
morning  by  one,  and  in  the  evening  by  two,  benedictions ;
the  second  being,  strictly  speaking,  an  evening  prayer.  The
"  Shema "  was  a  kind  of  "  belief,"  or  "  creed,"  composed  of
these  three  passages  of  Scripture:  Deut.  vi.  4-9;  xi.  13-
21  ;  Num.  xv.  37-41.  It  obtained  its  name  from  the  initial
word  "  shema  "  :  "  Hear,  O  Israel,"  in  Deut.  vi.  4.  From  the
Mishnah  (Ber.  i.  3)  we  learn,  that  this  part  of  the  service
existed  already  before  the  time  of  our  Lord ;  and  we  are
told  (Ber.  iii.  3),  that  all  males  were  bound  to  repeat  this
belief  twice  every  day  ;  children  and  slaves,  as  well  as  women,
being  exempted  from  the  obligation.  There  can  be  no
reasonable  doubt  on  the  subject,  as  the  Mishnah  expressly
mentions  the  three  Scriptural  sections  of  the  "  Shema,"  the
number  of  benedictions  before  and  after  it,  and  even  the
initial  words  of  the  closing  benediction  (Ber.  ii.  2  ;  i.  4 ;
Tamid,  v.  i).  We  have,  therefore,  here  certain  prayers  which
our  Lord  Himself  had  not  only  heard,  but  in  which  He  must
have  shared — to  what  extent  will  appear  in  the  sequel.  These
prayers  still  exist  in  the  synagogue,  although  with  later
additions,  which,  happily,  it  is  not  difficult  to  eliminate.
Before  transcribing  them,  it  may  be  quoted  as  a  mark  of  the

1  Our  description  here  applies  to  the  worship  of  the  ancient,  not  of  the  modern
synagogue ;  and  we  have  thought  it  best  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  testimony  of
the  Mishnah,  so  as  to  avoid  the  danger  of  bringing  in  practices  of  a  later  date.


The  Worship  of  the  Synagogue.  269

value  attached  to  them,  that  it  was  lawful  to  say  this  and  the
3ther  daily  prayers — to  which  we  shall  hereafter  refer — and
the  "grace  at  meat,"  not  only  in  the  Hebrew,  but  in  any  other
language,  in  order  to  secure  a  general  understanding  of  the
service  (Sotah,  vii.  i).  At  the  same  time,  expressions  are
used  which  lead  us  to  suppose  that,  while  the  liturgical
formulae  connected  with  the  "  Shema  "  were  fixed,  there  were
local  variations,  in  the  way  of  lengthening  or  shortening
(Ber.  i.  4).  The  following  are  the  "  benedictions  "  before  the
"  Shema,"  in  their  original  form  :

I.  "  Blessed  be  Thou,  O  Lord,  King  of  the  world,  Who
formest   the  light  and  Greatest   the  darkness,  Who   makest
peace  and  Greatest  everything  ;  Who,  in  mercy,  givest  light  to
the  earth  and  to  those  who  dwell  upon  it,  and  in  Thy  good-
ness day  by  day  and  every  day  renewest  the  works  of  creation.
Blessed  be  the  Lord  our  God  for  the  glory  of  His  handiwork
and  for  the  light-giving  lights  which  He  has  made  for  His
praise.     Selah !     Blessed  be   the  Lord  our  God,  Who  hath
formed  the  lights."1

II.  "  With  great  love  hast  Thou  loved  us,  O  Lord  our  God,
and   with   much  overflowing  pity  hast  Thou  pitied  us,  our
Father  and  our  King.    For  the  sake  of  our  fathers  who  trusted
in  Thee,  and  Thou  taughtest  them  the  statutes  of  life,  have
mercy  upon  us  and  teach  us.    Enlighten  our  eyes  in  Thy  law ;
cause  our  hearts  to  cleave  to  Thy  commandments  ;  unite  our
hearts  to  love  and  fear  Thy  name,  and  we  shall  not  be  put  to
shame,  world  without  end.     For  Thou  art  a  God  Who  pre-

1  This  "benediction,"  while  acknowledging  the  Creator,  has  such  frequent
reference  to  God  in  connection  with  the  "lights,"  that  it  reads  like  a  confession
of  Israel  against  the  idolatries  of  Babylon.  This  circumstance  may  help  to  fix
the  time  of  its  origination.


270  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

parest  salvation,  and  us  hast  Thou  chosen  from  among  all
nations  and  tongues,  and  hast  in  truth  brought  us  near  to
Thy  great  Name — Selah — that  we  may  lovingly  praise  Thee
and  Thy  Oneness.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  Who  in  love  chose
His  people  Israel."1

After  this  followed  the  "  Shema."  The  Mishnah  gives  the
following  beautiful  explanation  of  the  order  in  which  the
portions  of  Scripture  of  which  it  is  composed  are  arranged
(Ber.  ii.  2).  The  section  Deut.  vi.  4-9  is  said  to  precede  that
inxi.  13-21,  so  that  we  might  "  take  upon  ourselves  the  yoke
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  only  after  that  the  yoke  of
the  commandments."  Again :  Deut.  xi.  13-21  precedes
Num.  xv.  37-41,  because  the  former  applies,  as  it  were,  both
night  and  day ;  the  latter  only  by  day.  The  reader  cannot
fail  to  observe  the  light  cast  by  the  teaching  of  the  Mishnah
upon  the  gracious  invitation  of  our  Lord :  "  Come  unto  Me,
all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give
you  rest.  Take  My  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  Me ;  for
I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye  shall  find  rest
unto  your  souls.  For  My  yoke  is  easy,  and  My  burden  is
light"  (Matt.  xi.  28-30).  These  words  must  indeed  have
had  a  special  significance  to  those  who  remembered  the
Rabbinic  lesson  as  to  the  relation  between  the  kingdom
of  heaven  and  the  commandments,  and  they  would  now
understand  how  by  coming  to  the  Saviour  they  would  first
take  upon  them  "  the  yoke  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  and
then  that  of  "  the  commandments,"  finding  this  "  yoke
easy"  and  the  "burden  light."

1  This  reads  peculiarly  like  the  thanksgiving  of  Israel  as  God's  covenant
people.


The  Worship  of  the  Synagogue.  271

The  prayer  after  the  "  Shema  "  was  as  follows  : l

"  True  it  is,  that  Thou  art  Jehovah  our  God  and  the  God  of
our  fathers,  our  King  and  the  King  of  our  fathers,  our  Saviour
and  the  Saviour  of  our  fathers,  our  Creator,  the  Rock  of  our
salvation,  our  Help  and  our  Deliverer.  Thy  Name  is  from
everlasting,  and  there  is  no  God  beside  Thee.  A  new  song
did  they  that  were  delivered  sing  to  Thy  Name  by  the  sea-
shore ;  together  did  all  praise  and  own  Thee  King,  and  say,
Jehovah  shall  reign  world  without  end  !  Blessed  be  the  Lord
Who  saveth  Israel!"

The  anti-Sadducean  views  expressed  in  this  prayer  will
strike  the  student  of  that  period,  while  he  will  also  be  much
impressed  with  its  suitableness  and  beauty.  The  special
prayer  for  the  evening  is  of  not  quite  so  old  a  date  as  the
three  just  quoted.  But  as  it  is  referred  to  in  the  Mishnah,
and  is  so  apt  and  simple,  we  reproduce  it,  as  follows :

"  O  Lord  our  God !  cause  us  to  lie  down  in  peace,  and
raise  us  up  again  to  life,  O  our  King !  Spread  over  us  the
tabernacle  of  Thy  peace ;  strengthen  us  before  Thee  in  Thy
good  counsel,  and  deliver  us  for  Thy  Name's  sake.  Be  Thou
for  protection  round  about  us ;  keep  far  from  us  the  enemy,
the  pestilence,  the  sword,  famine,  and  affliction.  Keep  Satan
from  before  and  from  behind  us,  and  hide  us  in  the  shadow  of
Thy  wings,  for  Thou  art  a  God  Who  helpest  and  deliverest
us ;  and  Thou,  O  God,  art  a  gracious  and  merciful  King.
Keep  Thou  our  going  out  and  our  coming  in,  for  life  and  for
peace,  from  henceforth  and  for  ever ! "  s

1  In  the  form  here  given  it  is  older  than  even  the  prayer  referred  to  in  the
Mishnah  (Ber.  ii.  2).

2  To  this  prayer  a  further  addition  was  made  at  a  later  period.     On  the  whole,
compare  Zunz,  Gottesd.  Vortr.  p.  367,  etc.


27*  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

The  "Shema"  and  its  accompanying  "benedictions"  seem
to  have  been  said  in  the  synagogue  at  the  lectern ;  whereas
for  the  next  series  of  prayers  the  leader  of  the  devotions  went
forward  and  stood  before  "  the  ark."  Hence  the  expression,
"to  go  up  before  the  ark,"  for  leading  in  prayer.  This  differ-
ence in  position  seems  implied  in  many  passages  of  the
Mishnah  (specially  Megillak,  iv.),  which  makes  a  distinction
between  saying  the  "  Shema  "  and  "  going  up  before  the  ark."
The  prayers  offered  before  the  ark  consisted  of  the  so-called
eighteen  eulogies,  or  benedictions,  and  formed  the  "  tephillah,"
or  supplication,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term.  These
eighteen,  or  rather,  as  they  are  now,  nineteen,  eulogies  are  of
various  dates — the  earliest  being  the  first  three  and  the  last
three.  There  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  these  were
said  at  worship  in  the  synagogues,  when  our  Lord  was  present.
Next  in  date  are  eulogies  iv.,  v.,  vi.,  viii.,  ix.,  and  xvi.
Eulogy  vii.,  which  in  its  present  position  seems  somewhat
incongruous,  dates  from  a  period  of  great  national  calamity —
perhaps  the  time  of  Pompey.  The  other  eulogies,  and  some
insertions  in  the  older  benedictions,  were  added  after  the  fall
of  the  Jewish  commonwealth — eulogy  xii.  especially  being
intended  against  the  early  Jewish  converts  to  Christianity.
In  all  likelihood  it  had  been  the  practice  originally  to  insert
prayers  of  private  composition  between  the  (present)  first
three  and  last  three  eulogies ;  and  out  of  these  the  later
eulogies  were  gradually  formulated.  At  any  rate,  we  know
that  on  Sabbaths  and  on  other  festive  occasions  only
the  first  three  and  the  last  three  eulogies  were  repeated,
other  petitions  being  inserted  between  them.  There  was
thus  room  for  the  endless  repetitions  and  "  long  prayers "
which  the  Saviour  condemned  (Mark  xii.  40;  Luke  xx.  47).


The  Worship  of  the  Synagogue.  273

Besides,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  both  on  entering  and
leaving  the  synagogue,  it  was  customary  to  offer  prayer,  and
that  it  was  a  current  Rabbinical  saying,  "  Prolix  prayer  pro-
longeth  life."  But  as  we  are  sure  that,  on  the  Sabbaths  when
our  Lord  attended  the  synagogues  at  Nazareth  and  Caper-
naum, the  first  three  and  the  last  three  of  the  eulogies  were
repeated,  we  produce  them  here,  as  follows  :

I.  "Blessed  be  the  Lord  our  God   and  the   God  of  our
fathers,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God
of  Jacob ;  the  great,  the  mighty,  and  the  terrible  God ;  the
Most  High  God,  Who  showeth  mercy  and  kindness,  Who
createth  all  things,  Who  remembereth  the  gracious  promises
to  the  fathers,  and  bringeth  a  Saviour  to  their  children's
children,   for    His    own    Name's   sake,   in   love.      O   King,
Helper,  Saviour,  and  Shield  !     Blessed  art  Thou,  O  Jehovah,
the  Shield  of  Abraham."

II.  "Thou,  O   Lord,   art  mighty  for  ever;    Thou,  Who
quickenest  the  dead,  art  mighty  to  save.     In  Thy  mercy  Thou
preservest  the  living;   Thou  quickenest  the  dead;  in  Thine
abundant  pity  Thou  bearest  up  those  who  fall,  and  healest
those  who  are  diseased,  and  loosest  those  who  are  bound,  and
fulfillest  Thy  faithful  word  to  those  who  sleep  in  the  dust.
Who  is  like  unto  Thee,  Lord  of  strength,  and  who  can  be
compared  to  Thee,  Who  killest  and  makest  alive,  and  causest
salvation  to  spring  forth  ?     And  faithful  art  Thou  to  give  life
unto  the  dead.     Blessed  be  Thou,  Jehovah,  Who  quickenest
the  dead!"

III.  "  Thou  art  holy,  and  Thy  Name  is  holy  ;  and  the  holy
ones   praise   Thee   every   day.     Selah !     Blessed   art   Thou,
Jehovah  God,  the  Holy  One!"

It  is  impossible  not  to  feel  the  solemnity  of  these  prayers.

T


271  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

They  breathe  the  deepest  hopes  of  Israel  in  simple,  Scriptural
language.     But  who  can  fully  realise  their  sacred  import  as
uttered  not  only  in  the  Presence,  but  by  the  very  lips  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who  Himself  was  their  answer  ?
The  three  concluding  eulogies  were  as  follows  :

XVII.  "  Take  gracious  pleasure,  O  Jehovah  our  God,  in
Thy  people  Israel,  and  in  their  prayers.     Accept  the  burnt-
offerings  of  Israel,  and  their  prayers,  with  Thy  good  pleasure ;
and  may  the  services  of  Thy  people  Israel  be  ever  acceptable
unto  Thee.    And  oh  that  our  eyes  may  see  it,  as  Thou  turnest
in  mercy  to  Zion !     Blessed  be  Thou,  O  Jehovah,  Who  re-
storeth  His  Shechinah  to  Zion  ! "

XVIII.  "  We  praise  Thee,  because  Thou  art  Jehovah  our
God,  and  the  God  of  our  fathers,  for  ever  and  ever.     Thou
art  the  Rock  of  our  life,  the  Shield  of  our  salvation,  from
generation  to  generation.     We  laud  Thee,  and  declare  Thy
praise  for  our  lives  which  are  kept  within  Thine  hand,  and
for  our  souls  which  are  committed  unto  Thee,  and  for  Thy
wonders  which  are  with  us  every  day,  and  Thy  wondrous
deeds  and  Thy  goodnesses,  which  are  at  all  seasons — evening,
morning,  and  mid-day.     Thou  gracious   One,  Whose   com-
passions never  end ;  Thou  pitying  One,  Whose  grace  never
ceaseth — for  ever  do  we  put  our  trust  in  Thee !     And  for  all
this  Thy  Name,  O  our  King,  be  blessed  and  extolled  always,
for  ever  and  ever !     And  all  living  bless  Thee — Selah — and
praise  Thy  Name  in  truth,  O  God,  our  Salvation  and  our
Help.    Blessed  art  Thou,  Jehovah ;  Thy  Name  is  the  gracious
One,  to  Whom  praise  is  due."

XIX.1  "  Oh  bestow  on  Thy  people  Israel  great  peace,  for

1  We  give  this  eulogy  in  its  shorter  form,  as  it  is  at  present  used  in  evening
prayer.


The  Worship  of  the  Synagogue.  275

ever  ;  for  Thou  art  King  and  Lord  of  all  peace,  and  it  is  good
in  Thine  eyes  to  bless  Thy  people  Israel  with  praise  at  all
times  and  in  every  hour.  Blessed  art  Thou,  Jehovah,  Who
blesseth  His  people  Israel  with  peace."

Another  fact,  hitherto,  so  far  as  we  know,  unnoticed,  re-
quires here  to  be  mentioned.  It  invests  the  prayers  just
quoted  with  a  new  and  almost  unparalleled  interest.  Ac-
cording to  the  Mishnah  (Megillah,  iv.  5),  the  person  who  read
in  the  synagogue  the  portion  from  the  prophets  was  also  ex-
pected to  say  the  "  Shema,"  and  to  offer  the  prayers  which
have  just  been  quoted.  It  follows  that,  in  all  likelihood,  our
Lord  Himself  had  led  the  devotions  in  the  synagogue  of
Capernaum  on  that  Sabbath  when  He  read  the  portion  from
the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  which  was  that  day  "  fulfilled  in
their  hearing"  (Luke  iv.  16-21).  Nor  is  it  possible  to  with-
stand the  impression,  how  specially  suitable  to  the  occasion
would  have  been  the  words  of  these  prayers,  particularly
those  of  eulogies  ii.  and  xvii.

The  prayers  were  conducted  or  repeated  aloud  by  one  indi-
vidual, specially  deputed  for  the  occasion,  the  congregation
responding  by  an  "  Amen."  The  liturgical  service  concluded
with  the  priestly  benediction  (Num.  vi.  23,  24),  spoken  by  the
descendants  of  Aaron.  In  case  none  such  were  present,  "  the
legate  of  the  Church,"  as  the  leader  of  the  devotions  was
called,  repeated  the  words  from  the  Scriptures  in  their  con-
nection. In  giving  the  benediction,  the  priests  elevated  their
hands  up  to  the  shoulders  (Sotah,  vii.  6)  ;  in  the  Temple,  up
to  the  forehead.  Hence  this  rite  is  designated  by  the  ex-
pression, "the  lifting  up  of  the  hands."1  According  to  the

1  The  apostle  may  have  had  this  in  his  mind  when,  in  directing  the  order  of
public  ministration,   he  spoke  of  "the  men    .     .     .    lifting  up  holy  hands,


276  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life,

present  practice,  the  fingers  of  the  two  hands  are  so  joined
together  and  separated  as  to  form  five  interstices ;  and  a
mystic  meaning  attaches  to  this.  It  was  a  later  superstition
to  forbid  looking  at  the  priests'  hands,  as  involving  physical
danger.  But  the  Mishnah  already  directs  that  priests  having
blemishes  on  their  hands,  or  their  fingers  dyed,  were  not  to
pronounce  the  benediction,  lest  the  attention  of  the  people
should  be  attracted.  Of  the  attitude  to  be  observed  in  prayer,
this  is  perhaps  scarcely  the  place  to  speak  in  detail.  Suffice
it,  that  the  body  was  to  be  fully  bent,  yet  so,  that  care  was
taken  never  to  make  it  appear  as  if  the  service  had  been  bur-
densome. One  of  the  Rabbis  tells  us,  that,  with  this  object
in  view,  he  bent  down  as  does  a  branch ;  while,  in  lifting
himself  up  again,  he  did  it  like  a  serpent — beginning  with  the
head !  Any  one  deputed  by  the  rulers  of  a  congregation
might  say  prayers,  except  a  minor.  This,  however,  applies
only  to  the  "  Shema."  The  eulogies  or  "  tephillah  "  proper,
as  well  as  the  priestly  benediction,  could  not  be  pronounced
by  those  who  were  not  properly  clothed,  nor  by  those  who
were  so  blind  as  not  to  be  able  to  discern  daylight.  If  any
one  introduced  into  the  prayers  heretical  views,  or  what  were
regarded  as  such,  he  was  immediately  stopped  ;  and,  if  any
impropriety  had  been  committed,  was  put  under  the  ban  for
a  week.  One  of  the  most  interesting  and  difficult  questions
relates  to  certain  modes  of  dress  and  appearance,  and
certain  expressions  used  in  prayer,  which  the  Mishnah
(Megillah,  iv.  8,  9)  declares  either  to  mark  heresy  or  to  indi-
cate that  a  man  was  not  to  be  allowed  to  lead  prayers  in
the  synagogue.  It  may  be,  that  some  of  these  statements

without  wrath  or  doubting  "  (i  Tim.  ii.  8).     At  any  rate,  the  expression  is  pre-
cisely the  same  as  that  used  by  the  Rabbis.


The  Worship  of  tJie  Synagogue.  277

refer  not  only  to  certain  Jewish  "  heretics,"  but  also  to  the
early  Jewish  Christians.  If  so,  they  may  indicate  certain
peculiarities  with  which  they  were  popularly  credited.1

Of  the  services  hitherto  noticed,  the  most  important  were
the  repetition  of  the  eulogies  and  the  priestly  benediction.
What  now  followed  was  regarded  as  quite  as  solemn,  if,
indeed,  not  more  so.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out,  that
the  main  object  of  the  synagogue  was  the  teaching  of  the
people.  This  was  specially  accomplished  by  the  reading  of
the  law.  At  present  the  Pentateuch  is  for  this  purpose
arranged  into  fifty-four  sections,  of  which  one  is  read  on  each
successive  Sabbath  of  the  year,  beginning  immediately  after
the  feast  of  Tabernacles.  But  anciently  the  lectionary,  at
least  in  Palestine,  seems  to  have  been  differently  arranged,
and  the  Pentateuch  so  divided  that  its  reading  occupied
three,  or,  according  to  some,  three  and  a-half  years  (half  a
Jubilee-period).2  The  section  for  the  day  was  subdivided,  so
that  every  Sabbath  at  least  seven  persons  were  called  up  to
read,  each  a  portion,  which  was  to  consist  of  not  less  than
three  verses.  The  first  reader  began,  and  the  last  closed,
with  a  benediction.  As  the  Hebrew  had  given  place  to  the
Aramaic,  a  "  meturgeman,"  or  interpreter,  stood  by  the  side
of  the  reader,  and  translated  verse  by  verse  into  the  verna-
cular. It  was  customary  to  have  service  in  the  synagogues,
not  only  on  Sabbaths  and  feast-days,  but  also  on  the  second
and  fifth  days  of  the  week  (Monday  and  Thursday),  when
the  country-people  came  to  market,  and  when  the  local

1  The  Gemara  (Ber.  33  b,  34  a)  adds  little  to  our  understanding  of  this  im-
portant question.

2  For  these  reasons  I  cannot  adopt  the  views  and  inferences  so  ably  stated  by
Mr.  Basil  Cooper  in  his  papers  on  "The  Synagogue,"  in  the  Sunday  at  Home  for
1876,  however  interesting.


278  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Sanhedrim  also  sat  for  the  adjudication  of  minor  causes.  At
such  week-day  services  only  three  persons  were  called  up  to
read  in  the  law;  on  new  moon's  day  and  on  the  interme-
diate days  of  a  festive  week,  four ;  on  festive  days — when
a  section  from  the  prophets  was  also  read — five ;  and  on  the
day  of  atonement,  six.  Even  a  minor  was  allowed  to  read,
and,  if  qualified,  to  act  as  "  meturgeman."  The  section
describing  the  sin  of  Reuben,  and  that  giving  a  second
account  of  the  sin  of  the  golden  calf,  were  read,  but  not  inter-
preted ;  those  recounting  the  priestly  blessing,  and,  again,  the
sin  of  David  and  of  Amnon,  were  neither  read  nor  interpreted.
The  reading  of  the  law  was  followed  by  a  lesson  from  the
prophets.  At  present  there  is  a  regular  lectionary,  in  which
these  lessons  are  so  selected  as  to  suit  the  sections  from
the  law  appointed  for  the  day.  This  arrangement  has  been
traced  to  the  time  of  the  Syrian  persecutions,  when
all  copies  of  the  law  were  sought  for  and  destroyed ;
and  the  Jewish  authorities  are  supposed  to  have  selected
portions  from  the  prophets  to  replace  those  from  the  law
which  might  not  be  produced  in  public.  But  it  is  evident
that,  if  these  persecuting  measures  had  been  rigidly  enforced,
the  sacred  rolls  of  the  prophets  would  not  have  escaped
destruction  any  more  than  those  of  the  law.  Besides,  it  is
quite  certain  that  such  a  lectionary  of  the  prophets  as  that
presently  in  use  did  not  exist  at  the  time  of  our  Lord,  nor
even  when  the  Mishnah  was  collated.  Considerable  liberty
seems  to  have  been  left  to  individuals ;  and  the  expression
used  by  St.  Luke  in  reference  to  our  Lord  in  the  synagogue
at  Capernaum  (Luke  iv.  17),  "And  when  He  had  opened  the
book,  He  found  the  place  where  it  was  written,"  most  accu-
rately describes  the  state  of  matters.  For,  from  Megillah


The  Worship  of  the  Synagogue.  279

iv.  4,  we  gather  that,  in  reading  from  the  prophets,  it  was
lawful  to  pass  over  one  or  more  verses,  provided  there  were
no  pause  between  the  reading  and  the  translation  of  the
"  meturgeman."  For  here  also  the  services  of  a  "meturgeman"
were  employed  ;  only  that  he  did  not,  as  in  reading  the  law,
translate  verse  by  verse,  but  after  every  three  verses.  It  is  a
remarkable  fact  that  the  Rabbis  exclude  from  public  reading
the  section  in  the  prophecies  of  Ezekiel  which  describes  "  the
chariot  and  wheels."  Rabbi  Elieser  would  also  have  excluded
that  in  Ezek.  xvi.  2.

The  reading  of  the  prophets  was  often  followed  by  a
sermon  or  address,  with  which  the  service  concluded.  The
preacher  was  called  "  darshan,"  and  his  address  a  "  derashah  "
(homily,  sermon,  from  "  darash,"  to  ask,  inquire,  or  discuss).
When  the  address  was  a  learned  theological  discussion —
especially  in  academies — it  was  not  delivered  to  the  people
directly,  but  whispered  into  the  ear  of  an  "  amora,"  or  speaker,
who  explained  to  the  multitude  in  popular  language  the
weighty  sayings  which  the  Rabbi  had  briefly  communicated
to  him.  A  more  popular  sermon,  on  the  other  hand,  was
called  a  "meamar,"  literally,  a  "  speech,  or  talk."  These
addresses  would  be  either  Rabbinical  expositions  of  Scripture,
or  else  doctrinal  discussions,  in  which  appeal  would  be  made
to  tradition  and  to  the  authority  of  certain  great  teachers.
For  it  was  laid  down  as  a  principle  (Eduj.  i.  3),  that  "  every
one  is  bound  to  teach  in  the  very  language  of  his  teacher."
In  view  of  this  two-fold  fact,  we  can  in  some  measure  under-
stand the  deep  impression  which  the  words  ot  our  Lord
produced,  even  on  those  who  remained  permanently  unin-
fluenced by  them.  The  substance  of  His  addresses  was  far
other  than  they  had  ever  heard  of,  or  conceived  possible.  It


280  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

seemed  as  if  they  opened  quite  a  new  world  of  thought,  hope,
duty,  and  comfort.  No  wonder  that  even  in  contemptuous
Capernaum  "  all  bare  Him  witness,  and  wondered  at  the
gracious  words  which  proceeded  out  of  His  mouth ; "  and
that  the  very  Temple-guard  sent  to  make  Him  prisoner  were
overawed,  and  before  the  council  could  only  give  this  account
of  their  strange  negligence :  "  Never  man  spake  like  this
man  "  (John  vii.  46).  Similarly,  the  form  also  of  His  teaching
was  so  different  from  the  constant  appeal  of  the  Rabbis  to
mere  tradition;  it  seemed  all  to  come  so  quite  fresh  and
direct  from  heaven,  like  the  living  waters  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
that  "the  people  were  astonished  at  His  doctrine:  for  He
taught  them  as  one  having  authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes  "
(Matt  vii.  28,  29).


CHAPTER    XVIII.

BRIEF   OUTLINE    OF   ANCIENT   JEWISH   THEOLOGICAL
LITERATURE.

THE  arrangements  of  the  synagogue,  as  hitherto  described,
combined  in  a  remarkably  manner  fixedness  of  order
with  liberty  of  the  individual.  Alike  the  seasons  and  the
time  of  public  services,  their  order,  the  prayers  to  be  offered,
and  the  portions  of  the  law  to  be  read  were  fixed.  On  the
other  hand,  between  the  eighteen  "benedictions"  said  on
ordinary  days,  and  the  seven  repeated  on  the  Sabbaths,  free
prayer  might  be  inserted ;  the  selection  from  the  prophets,
with  which  the  public  reading  concluded — the  "  Haphtarah  "
(from  "  patar,"  to  "  conclude  ") — seems  to  have  been  originally
left  to  individual  choice  ;  while  the  determination  who  was  to
read,  or  to  conduct  the  prayers,  or  to  address  the  people,  was
in  the  hands  of  the  "  rulers  of  the  synagogue  "  (Acts  xiii.  15).
The  latter,  who  were  probably  also  the  members  of  the  local
Sanhedrim,  had  naturally  charge  of  the  conduct  of  public
worship,  as  well  as  of  the  government  and  discipline  of  the
synagogues.  They  were  men  learned  in  the  law  and  of  good
repute,  whom  the  popular  voice  designated,  but  who  were
regularly  set  apart  by  "the  laying  on  of  hands,"  or  the


282  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

"  Semichah,"  which  was  done  by  at  least  three,  who  had  them-
selves received  ordination,  upon  which  the  candidate  had  the
formal  title  of  Rabbi  bestowed  on  him,  and  was  declared
qualified  to  administer  the  law  (Sank.  13  b).  The  Divine
Majesty  was  supposed  to  be  in  the  midst  of  each  Sanhedrim,
on  account  of  which  even  that  consisting  of  only  three
members  might  be  designated  as  "  Elohim."  Perhaps  this
may  have  been  said  in  explanation  and  application  of  Ps.
Ixxxii.  6:  "I  have  said,  Ye  are  Elohim;  and  all  of  you
children  of  the  Most  High."

The  special  qualifications  for  the  office  of  Sanhedrist,  men-
tioned in  Rabbinical  writings,  are  such  as  to  remind  us  of  the
directions  of  St.  Paul  to  Timothy  (i  Tim.  iii.  i-io).  A
member  of  the  Sanhedrim  must  be  wise,  modest,  God-fearing,
truthful,  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre,  given  to  hospitality,  kindly,
not  a  gambler,  nor  a  usurer,  nor  one  who  traded  in  the  pro-
duce of  Sabbatical  years,  nor  yet  one  who  indulged  in  un-
lawful games  (Sank.  iii.  3).  They  were  called  "  Sekenim,"
"  elders  "  (Luke  vii.  3),  "  Memunim,"  "  rulers  "  (Mark  v.  22),
"  Parnasin,"  "feeders,  overseers,  shepherds  of  the  flock  "  (Acts
xx.  28  ;  I  Pet.  v.  2),  and  "  Manhigei,"  "  guides  "  (Heb.  xiii.  7).
They  were  under  the  presidency  and  supreme  rule  of  an
" Archisynagogos,"  or  " Rosh-ha-Cheneseth,"  "head  of  the
synagogue  "  ( Yom.  vii.  i ;  Sot.  vii.  7),  who  sometimes  seems  to
have  even  exercised  sole  authority.  The  designation  occurs
frequently  in  the  New  Testament  (Matt.  ix.  18  ;  Mark  v.  35,
36,  38  ;  Luke  viii.  41,  49 ;  xiii.  14 ;  Acts  xviii.  8,  17).  The
inferior  functions  in  the  synagogue  devolved  on  the  "  chassan,"
or  "  minister  "  (Luke  iv.  20).  In  course  of  time,  however,  the
"  chassanim  "  combined  with  their  original  duties  the  office  of
schoolmaster ;  and  at  present  they  lead  both  the  singing  and


Ancient  Jewish   Theological  Literature.       283

the  devotions  of  the  synagogue.  This  duty  originally
devolved  not  on  any  fixed  person,  but  whoever  was  chosen
might  for  the  time  being  act  as  "  Sheliach  Zibbur,"  or  "  legate
of  the  congregation."  Most  modern  writers  have  imagined,  that
the  expression  "  angel  of  the  Church,"  in  the  epistles  to  the
seven  churches  in  the  book  of  Revelation,  was  used  in  allusion
to  this  ancient  arrangement  of  the  synagogue.  But  the  fact
that  the  "  Sheliach  Zibbur "  represented  not  an  office  but  a
function,  renders  this  view  untenable.  Besides,  in  that  case,
the  corresponding  Greek  expression  would  rather  have  been
"  apostle  "  than  "  angel  of  the  Church."  Possibly,  however,
the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  may  refer  to  it,  when
he  designates  the  Lord  Jesus  "  the  Apostle  and  High-Priest  ol
our  profession  "  (Heb.  iii.  i).  Besides  these  functionaries,  we
also  read  of  "  Gabaei  Zedakah,"  or  collectors  of  charity,  to
whom  the  Talmud  (B.  Bathra,  8  b)  by  &jeu  de  mots1  applies
the  promise  that  they  "  shall  be  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever  "
(Dan.  xii.  3),  since  they  lead  many  to  "  righteousness."  Alms
were  collected  at  regular  times  every  week,  either  in  money
or  in  victuals.  At  least  two  were  employed  in  collecting,  and
three  in  distributing  charity,  so  as  to  avoid  the  suspicion  of
dishonesty  or  partiality..  These  collectors  of  charity,  who
required  to  be  "men  of  good  repute,  and  faithful,"  are
thought  by  many  to  have  been  the  model  for  the  institution
of  the  Diaconate  in  the  early  Church.  But  the  analogy
scarcely  holds  good ;  nor,  indeed,  were  such  collectors
employed  in  every  synagogue.

In  describing  the  conduct  of  public  worship  in  the  syna-
gogues, reference  was  made  to  the  "  meturgeman,"  wh®
translated  into  the  vernacular  dialect  what  was  read  out  of

1  Zedakah  means  righteousness,  but  is  also  used  for  "  charity."


284  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

the   Hebrew   Scriptures,   and    also  to  the  "darshan,"   who
expounded  the  Scriptures  or  else  the  traditional  law  in  an
address,  delivered  after  the  reading  of  the  "  Haphtarah,"  or
section    from    the    prophets.     These   two   terms   will   have
suggested  names  which  often  occur  in  writings  on  Jewish
subjects,  and   may  fitly  lead   to  some   remarks  on  Jewish
theology  at  the  time  of  our  Lord.     Now  the  work  of  the
"  meturgeman  " l  was  perpetuated  in  the  Targum,  and  that  of
the  "  darshan  "  in  the  Midrash.     Primarily  the  Targum,  then,
was  intended  as  a  translation  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  into
the  vernacular  Aramaean.    Of  course,  such  translations  might
be  either  literal,  or  else  more  or  less  paraphrastic.     Every
Targum  would  also  naturally  represent  the  special  views  of
the  translator,  and  be  interesting  as  affording  an  insight  into
the  ideas  prevalent  at  the  time,  and  the  manner  in  which
Scripture  was  understood.     But  some  Targumim  are  much
more  paraphrastic  than  others,  and  indeed  become  a  kind  of
commentary,  showing  us  the  popular  theology  of  the  time.
Strictly  speaking,  we  have  really  no  Targum  dating  from  the
time  of  our  Lord,  nor  even  from  the  first  century  of  our  era.
There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  such  a  Targum  did
exist,  although  it  has  been  lost.    Still,  the  Targumim  preserved
to  us,  although  collated,  and  having  received  their  present
form  at  later  periods,  contain  very  much  that  dates  from  the
Temple-period,  and  even  before  that.     Mentioning  them  in
the  order  of  their  comparative  antiquity,  we  have  the  Targum
of  Onkelos,  on  the  five  books  of  Moses;    the  Targum  of
Jonathan,  on  the  prophets  (inclusive  of  Joshua,  Judges,  and
the  books  of  Samuel  and  of  the  Kings) ;    the  so-called  (or
pseudo)   Jonathan   on   the   Pentateuch ;    and  the  Jerusalem

1  Hence  also  the  term  "  dragoman."


Ancient  Jewish   Theological  Literature.        285

Targum,  which  is  but  a  fragment.  Probably  the  latter  two
were  intended  to  be  supplemental  to  the  Targum  Onkelos.
Late  criticism  has  thrown  doubt  even  on  the  existence  of  such
a  person  as  Onkelos.  Whoever  may  have  been  the  author,
this  Targum,  in  its  present  form,  dates  probably  from  the
third,  that  of  Jonathan  on  the  prophets  from  the  fourth
century.

In  some  respects  more  interesting  than  the  Targumim  are
the  Midrashim,  of  which  we  possess  three,  dating  probably,
in  their  present  form,  from  the  first  or  second  century  of  our
era,  but  embodying  many  parts  much  older.  These  are —
mentioning  them  again  in  the  order  of  their  antiquity —
"  Siphra  "  (the  book),  a  commentary  on  Leviticus  ;  "  Siphri,"
a  commentary  on  Numbers  and  Deuteronomy ;  and  "  Me-
chiltha,"  a  commentary  on  certain  portions  of  Exodus.  But
we  have  even  a  monument  more  interesting  than  these,  of  the
views  of  the  ancient  Pharisees,  and  of  their  Scriptural  inter-
pretations. Some  of  the  fathers  referred  to  a  work  called
"  Lesser  Genesis,"  or  the  "  Book  of  Jubilees."  This  had  been
lost  to  theological  literature,  till  again  discovered  within  the
present  century,  although  not  in  the  original  Hebrew,  nor
even  in  its  first  or  Greek  translation,  but  in  an  Ethiopic
rendering  from  the  latter.  The  work,  which  no  doubt
dates  from  the  era  of  our  Lord,  covers  the  same  ground  as
the  first  book  of  Moses,  whence  the  name  of  "  Lesser  Genesis."
It  gives  the  Biblical  narrative  from  the  creation  of  the  world
to  the  institution  of  the  Passover,  in  the  spirit  in  which  the
Judaism  of  that  period  would  view  it.  The  legendary  addi-
tions, the  Rabbinical  ideas  expressed,  the  interpretations
furnished,  are  just  such  as  one  would  expect  to  find  in  such  a
work.  One  of  the  main  objects  of  the  writer  seems  to  have


286  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

been  the  chronology  of  the  book  of  Genesis,  which  it  is
attempted  to  settle.  All  events  are  recorded  according  to
Jubilee-periods  of  forty-nine  years,  whence  the  name  "  Book
of  Jubilees,"  given  to  the  work.  These  "Jubilees"  are  again
arranged  into  "  weeks,"  each  of  seven  years  (a  day  for  a  year) ;
and  events  are  classified  as  having  taken  place  in  a  certain
month  of  a  certain  year,  of  a  certain  "  week  "  of  years,  of  a
certain  "  Jubilee  "-period.  Another  tendency  of  the  book,
which,  however,  it  has  in  common  with  all  similar  productions,
is  to  trace  up  all  later  institutions  to  the  patriarchal  period.1

Besides  these  works,  another  class  of  theological  literature
has  been  preserved  to  us,  around  which  of  late  much  and
most  serious  controversy  has  gathered.  Most  readers,  of
course,  know  about  the  Apocrypha ;  but  these  works  are
called  the  "  pseudo-epigraphic  writings."  Their  subject-
matter  may  be  described  as  mainly  dealing  with  unfulfilled
prophecy;  and  they  are  couched  in  language  and  figures
borrowed,  among  others,  from  the  book  of  Daniel.  In  fact,
they  read  like  attempts  at  imitating  certain  portions  of  that
prophecy — only  that  their  scope  is  sometimes  wider.  This
class  of  literature  is  larger  than  those  not  acquainted  with  the
period  might  have  expected.  Yet  when  remembering  the
troubles  of  the  time,  the  feverish  expectations  of  a  coming
deliverance,  and  the  peculiar  cast  of  mind  and  training  of
those  who  wrote  them,  they  scarcely  seem  more  numerous,
nor  perhaps  even  more  extravagant,  than  a  certain  kind  of
prophetic  literature,  abundant  among  us  not  long  ago,  which
the  fear  of  Napoleon  or  other  political  events  from  time

i  Although  the  "Book  of  Jubilees"  seems  most  likely  of  Pharisaic  authorship,
the  views  expressed  in  it  are  not  always  those  of  the  Pharisees.  Thus  the  resur-
rection is  denied,  although  the  immortality  of  the  soul  is  maintained.


Ancient  Jewish  Theological  Literature.       287

to  time  called  forth.  To  that  kind  of  productions  they  seem,
at  least  to  us,  to  bear  an  essential  likeness — only  that,  unlike
the  Western,  the  Oriental  expounder  of  unfulfilled  prophecy
assumes  rather  the  language  of  the  prophet  than  that  of  the
commentator,  and  clothes  his  views  in  mystic  emblematic
language.  In  general,  this  kind  of  literature  may  be  arranged
into  Greek  and  Hebrew — according  as  the  writers  were
either  Egyptian  (Hellenistic)  or  Palestinian  Jews.  Con-
siderable difficulty  exists  as  to  the  precise  date  of  some  of
these  writings — whether  previous  or  subsequent  to  the  time
of  Christ.  These  difficulties  are,  of  course,  increased  when  it
is  sought  to  fix  the  precise  period  when  each  of  them  was
composed.  Still,  late  historical  investigations  have  led  to
much  accord  on  general  points.  Without  referring  to  the
use  which  opponents  of  Christianity  have  of  late  attempted  to
make  of  these  books,  it  may  be  safely  asserted  that  their
proper  study  and  interpretation  will  yet  be  made  very
helpful,  not  only  in  casting  light  upon  the  period,  but  in
showing  the  essential  difference  between  the  teaching  of  the
men  of  that  age  and  that  of  the  New  Testament.1  For
each  branch  and  department  of  sacred  study,  the  more
carefully,  diligently,  and  impartially  it  is  pursued,  affords
only  fresh  testimony  to  that  truth  which  is  most  certainly,
and  on  the  best  and  surest  grounds,  believed  among  us.

It  were,  however,  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  Rabbinical
views,  extravagant  as  they  so  often  are,  were  propounded
quite  independently  of  Scripture.  On  the  contrary,  every
traditional  ordinance,  every  Rabbinical  institution,  nay,  every
legend  and  saying,  is  somehow  foisted  upon  the  text  of  the

1  This  most  important  and  interesting  subject  is  one  of  those  which  must  be
specially  reserved  for  full  elaboration  in  a  larger  work.


288  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

Old  Testament.  To  explain  this,  even  in  the  briefest  manner,
it  is  necessary  to  state  that,  in  general,  Jewish  traditionalism
is  distinguished  into  the  "  Halachah "  and  the  "  Haggadah."
The  "Halachah"  (from" halach,"  to  "walk")  indicates  the
settled  legal  determinations,  which  constituted  the  "oral
law,"  or  "Thorah  shebeal  peh."  Nothing  could  here  be
altered,  nor  was  any  freedom  left  to  the  individual  teacher,
save  that  of  explanation  and  illustration.  The  object  of  the
"Halachah"  was  to  state  in  detail,  and  to  apply  to  all
possible  cases,  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  law  of  Moses ;
as  also  to  surround  it,  as  it  were,  with  "  a  hedge,"  in  order
to  render  every  unwitting  transgression  impossible.  The
"Halachah"  enjoyed  not  only  the  same  authority  with  the
law  of  Moses,  but,  as  being  explanatory,  in  some  respects
was  even  more  highly  esteemed.  Indeed,  strictly  speak-
ing, it  was  regarded  as  equally  with  the  Pentateuch  the
revelation  of  God  to  Moses  ;  only  the  form  or  manner  of
revelation  was  regarded  as  different — the  one  being  com-
mitted to  writing,  the  other  handed  down  by  word  of  mouth.
According  to  tradition,  Moses  explained  the  traditional  law
successively  to  Aaron,  to  his  sons,  to  the  seventy  elders,
and  to  the  people — care  being  taken  that  each  class  heard
it  four  times  (Maimonides*  Preface  to  Seraim,  i  a).  The
Talmud  itself  attempts  to  prove  that  the  whole  traditional
law,  as  well  as  the  writings  of  the  prophets  and  the  Hagio-
grapha,  had  been  communicated  to  Moses,  by  quoting
Ex.  xxiv.  12:  "I  will  give  thee  tables  of  stone,  and  a  law,
and  commandments  which  I  have  written ;  that  thou  mayest
teach  them."  "  The  '  tables  of  stone/ "  argues  Rabbi  Lev!
(Ber.  5  a),  "are  the  ten  commandments;  the  'law'  is  the
written  law  (in  the  Pentateuch) ;  the  'commandments'  are  the


Ancient  Jewish   Theological  Literature.       289

Mishnah ;  *  which  I  have  written/  refers  to  the  prophets  and
the  Hagiographa  ;  while  the  words,  '  that  thou  mayest  teach
them/  point  to  the  Gemara.  From  this  we  learn,  that  all  this
was  given  to  Moses  on  Sinai."

If  such  was  the  "  Halachah,"  it  is  not  so  easy  to  define  the
limits  of  the  "  Haggadah."  The  term,  which  is  derived  from
the  verb  "higgid,"  to  "discuss,"  or  "tell  about,"  covers  all
that  possessed  not  the  authority  of  strict  legal  determinations,
It  was  legend,  or  story,  or  moral,  or  exposition,  or  discussion,
or  application — in  short,  whatever  the  fancy  or  predilections
of  a  teacher  might  choose  to  make  it,  so  that  he  could  some-
how connect  it  either  with  Scripture  or  with  a  "  Halachah."
For  this  purpose  some  definite  rules  were  necessary  to  pre-
serve, if  not  from  extravagance,  at  least  from  utter  absurdity.
Originally  there  were  four  such  canons  for  connecting  the
"  Haggadah  "  with  Scripture.  Contracting,  after  the  favourite
manner  of  the  Jews,  the  initial  letters,  these  four  canons  were
designated  by  the  word  "  Pwdts  "  1  (Paradise).  They  were —

1.  To  ascertain  the  plain  meaning  of  a  passage  (the  "Peshat");

2.  To  take  the  single  letters  of  a  word  as  an  indication  or
hint  ("  Remes  ")  of  other  words,  or  even  of  whole  sentences  j

3.  The  "  Derush,"  or  practical  exposition  of  a  passage ;  and

4.  To  find  out  the  "  Sod  "  (mystery),  or  mystical  meaning  of
a  verse  or  word.     These  four  canons  were  gradually  enlarged
into  thirty- two  rules,  which  gave  free  vent  to  every  kind  o/
fancifulness.      Thus   one   of   these   rules  —  the   "Gematria*
(geometry,  calculation) — allowed  the  interpreter  to  find  out
the  numerical  value  of  the  letters  in  a  word — the  HebreM
letters,  like  the  Roman,   being  also  numerals — and  to  sub-
stitute for  a  word  one  or  more  which  had  the  same  numerica'

1  Of  course  the  vowels  are  not  marked  in  the  Hebrew.


290  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

value.  Thus,  if  in  Num.  xii.  I  we  read  that  Moses  was
married  to  an  "Ethiopian  woman"  (in  the  original,  "Cushith"),
Onkelos  substitutes  instead  of  this,  by  "gematria,"  the  words,
*'  of  fair  appearance  " — the  numerical  value  both  of  Cushith
and  of  the  words  "of  fair  appearance"  being  equally  736.
By  this  substitution  the  objectionable  idea  of  Moses'  marrying
an  Ethiopian  was  at  the  same  time  removed.  Similarly,  the
Mishnah  maintains  that  those  who  loved  God  were  to  inherit
each  310  worlds,  the  numerical  value  of  the  word  "substance"
("Yesh")  in  Prov.  viii.  21  being  3IO.1  On  the  other  hand,
the  canons  for  the  deduction  of  a  "  Halachah  "  from  the  text
of  Scripture  were  much  more  strict  and  logical.  Seven  such
rules  are  ascribed  to  Hillel,  which  were  afterwards  enlarged
to  thirteen.8  Little  objection  can  be  taken  to  them  ;  but
unfortunately  their  practical  application  was  generally  almost
as  fanciful,  and  certainly  as  erroneous,  as  in  the  case  of  the
"  Haggadah."

Probably  most  readers  would  wish  to  know  something
more  of  those  "  traditions "  to  which  our  Lord  so  often
referred  in  His  teaching.  We  have  here  to  distinguish,
in  the  first  place,  between  the  Mishnah  and  the  Gemara.
The  former  was,  so  to  speak,  the  text,  the  latter  its
extended  commentary.  At  the  same  time,  the  Mishnah  con-
tains also  a  good  deal  of  commentary,  and  much  that  is.  not
either  legal  determination  or  the  discussion  thereof;  while  the
Gemara,  on  the  other  hand,  also  contains  what  we  would  call
41  text."  The  word  Mishnah  (from  the  verb  "  shanah  ")  means

1  Compare  Gfrorer,  Jahrh.  d.  Heils,  i.  p.  244,  etc.

*  It  would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  this  volume  to  explain  these  "middoth,"  or
"measurements,"  and  to  illustrate  them  by  examples.  Those  who  are  interested
in  the  matter  are  referred  to  the  very  full  discussion  on  Rabbinical  exegesis  in  my
History  of  the  Jewish  Nation,  pp.  570-580.


Ancient  Jewish   Theological  Literature.       291

"  repetition  " — the  term  referring  to  the  supposed  repetition  of
the  traditional  law,  which  has  been  above  described.  The
Gemara,  as  the  very  word  shows,  means  "discussion,"  and
embodies  the  discussions,  opinions,  and  sayings  of  the  Rabbis
upon,  or  a  propos  of,  the  Mishnah.  Accordingly,  the  text  of
the  Mishnah  is  always  given  in  the  pages  of  the  Talmud,
which  reproduce  those  discussions  thereon  of  the  Jewish
theological  parliament  or  academy,  which  constitute  the
Gemara.  The  authorities  introduced  in  the  Mishnah  and
the  Gemara  range  from  about  the  year  180  B.C.  to  430  A.D.
(in  the  Babylon  Talmud).  The  Mishnah  is,  of  course,  the
oldest  work,  and  dates,  in  its  present  form  and  as  a  written
compilation,  from  the  close  of  the  second  century  of  our
era.  Its  contents  are  chiefly  "  Halachah,"  there  being  only-
one  Tractate  (Aboth)  in  which  there  is  no  "  Halachah "  at
all,  and  another  (on  the  measurements  of  the  Temple)  in
which  it  but  very  rarely  occurs.  Yet  these  two  Tractates  are
of  the  greatest  historical  value  and  interest.  On  the  other
hand,  there  are  thirteen  whole  Tractates  in  the  Mishnah  which
have  no  "  Haggadah "  at  all,  and  other  twenty-two  in  which
it  is  but  of  rare  occurrence.  Very  much  of  the  Mishnah  must
be  looked  upon  as  dating  before,  and  especially  from  the  time
of  Christ,  and  its  importance  for  the  elucidation  of  the  New
Testament  is  very  great,  though  it  requires  to  be  most  judi-
ciously used.  The  Gemara,  or  book  of  discussions  on  the  Mish-
nah, forms  the  two  Talmuds — the  Jerusalem  and  the  Babylon
Talmud.  The  former  is  so  called  because  it  is  the  product
of  the  Palestinian  academies  ;  the  latter  is  that  of  the  Baby-
lonian school.  The  completion  of  the  Jerusalem  or  Palestinian
TalmuJ  ("  Talmud  "  =  doctrine,  lore)  dates  from  the  middle
of  the  fourth,  that  of  the  Babylonian  from  the  middle  of  the


292  Sketches  of  Jeivish  Life.

sixth,  century  of  our  era.  It  need  scarcely  be  said  that  the
former  is  of  much  greater  historical  value  than  the  latter.
Neither  of  these  two  Gemaras,  as  we  now  possess  them,  is
quite  complete — that  is,  there  are  Tractates  in  the  Mishnah
for  which  we  have  no  Gemara,  either  in  the  Jerusalem  or  in
the  Babylon  Talmud.  Lastly,  the  Babylon  Talmud  is  more
than  four  times  the  size  of  that  of  Jerusalem.  Obviously  this
is  not  the  place  for  giving  even  the  briefest  outline  of  the  con-
tents of  the  Mishnah.1  Suffice  it  here  to  state  that  it  consists
of  six  books  ("  sedarim,"  "  orders  "),  which  are  subdivided
into  Tractates  ("  Massichthoth "),  and  these  again  into
chapters  ("  Perakim  "),  and  single  determinations  or  traditions
("  Mishnaioth  ").  In  quoting  the  Mishnah  it  is  customary  to
mention  not  the  Book  (or  "  Seder  ")  but  the  special  Tractate,
the  Perek  (or  chapter),  and  the  Mishnah.  The  names  of  these
Tractates  (not  those  of  the  books)  give  a  sufficient  idea  of
their  contents,  which  cover  every  conceivable,  and  well-nigh
every  inconceivable  case,  with  full  discussions  thereon.  Alto-
gether the  Mishnah  contains  sixty-three  Tractates,  consisting
of  525  chapters,  and  4,187  "Mishnaioth."

There  is  yet  another  branch  of  Jewish  theology,  which  in
some  respects  is  the  most  interesting  to  the  Christian  student.
There  can  be  no  doubt,  that  so  early  as  the  time  of  our  Lord
«  series  of  doctrines  and  speculations  prevailed  which  were
kept  secret  from  the  multitude,  and  even  from  ordinary
students,  probably  from  fear  of  leading  them  into  heresy.
This  class  of  study  bears  the  general  name  of  the  "  Kabba-
lah," and,  as  even  the  term  (from  "  kabal,"  to  "  receive,"  or
"hand  down")  implies,  represents  the  spiritual  traditions

;  In  Appendix  I.  we  give  as  a  specimen  a  translation  of  one  of  the  Mishnic
Tractates  ;  and  in  Appendix  II.  translations  of  extracts  from  the  Babylon  Talmud.


Ancient  Jewish   Theological  Literature.       293

handed  down  from  earliest  times,  although  mixed  up,  in
course  of  time,  with  many  foreign  and  spurious  elements.
The  "  Kabbalah  "  grouped  itself  chiefly  around  the  history  of
the  creation,  and  the  mystery  of  God's  Presence  and  Kingdom
in  the  world,  as  symbolised  in  the  vision  of  the  chariot  and  of
the  wheels  (Ezek.  i.).  Much  that  is  found  in  Cabbalistic
writings  approximates  so  closely  to  the  higher  truths  of
Christianity,  that,  despite  the  errors,  superstitions,  and  follies
that  mingle  with  it,  we  cannot  fail  to  recognise  the  con-
tinuance and  the  remains  of  those  deeper  facts  of  Divine
revelation,  which  must  have  formed  the  substance  of  pro-
phetic teaching  under  the  Old  Testament,  and  have  been
understood,  or  at  least  hoped  for,  by  those  who  were  under
the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

If  now,  at  the  close  of  these  sketches  of  Jewish  life,  we  ask
ourselves,  what  might  have  been  expected  as  to  the  relation
between  Christ  and  the  men  and  the  religion  of  His  period,
the  answer  will  not  be  difficult.  Assuredly,  in  one  respect
Christ  could  not  have  been  a  stranger  to  His  period,  or  else
His  teaching  would  have  found  no  response,  and,  indeed,
have  been  wholly  unintelligible  to  His  contemporaries.  Nor
did  He  address  them  as  strangers  to  the  covenant,  like  the
heathen.  His  was  in  every  respect  the  continuation,  the
development,  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  Old  Testament.  Only,
He  removed  the  superincumbent  load  of  traditionalism;  He
discarded  the  externalism,  the  formalism,  and  the  work-
righteousness,  which  had  well-nigh  obliterated  the  spiritual
truths  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  substituted  in  their  place
the  worship  of  the  letter.  The  grand  spiritual  facts,  which  it
embodied,  He  brought  forward  in  all  their  brightness  and
meaning ;  the  typical  teaching  of  that  dispensation  He  came


294  Sketches  of  Jewish  Life.

to  show  forth  and  to  fulfil ;  and  its  prophecies  He  accom-
plished, alike  for  Israel  and  the  world.  And  so  in  Him  all
that  was  in  the  Old  Testament — of  truth,  way,  and  life —
became  "  Yea  and  Amen."  Thus  we  can  understand  how,  on
the  one  hand,  the  Lord  could  avail  Himself  of  every  spiritual
element  around,  and  adopt  the  sayings,  parables,  ideas,  and
customs  of  that  period — indeed,  must  have  done  so,  in  order
to  be  a  true  man  of  the  period, — and  yet  be  so  wholly  not  of
that  time  as  to  be  despised,  rejected,  and  delivered  up  unto
death  by  the  blind  guides  of  His  blinded  fellow-countrymen.
Had  He  entirely  discarded  the  period  in  which  He  lived,  had
He  not  availed  Himself  of  all  in  it  that  was  true  or  might  be
useful,  He  would  not  have  been  of  it — not  the  true  man
Christ  Jesus.  Had  He  followed  it,  identified  Himself  with-
its  views  and  hopes,  or  headed  its  movements,  He  would  not
have  been  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  the  promised
Deliverer  from  sin  and  guilt.1

And  so  we  can  also  perceive  the  reason  of  the  essential
enmity  to  Christ  on  the  part  of  the  Pharisees  and  Scribes.
It  was  not  that  He  was  a  new  and  a  strange  Teacher  ;  it  was,
that  He  came  as  the  Christ.  Theirs  was  not  an  opposition
of  teaching  to  His ;  it  was  a  contrariety  of  fundamental
life-principles.  "  Light  came  into  the  world,  but  men  loved
darkness  rather  than  light."  Closely  related  as  the  two
were,  the  Pharisaical  Judaism  of  that  and  of  the  present
period  is  at  the  opposite  pole  from  the  religion  of  Christ
— alike  as  regards  the  need  of  man,  the  purposes  of  God's
love,  and  the  privileges  of  His  children.  There  was  one
truth  which,  we  are  reluctantly  obliged  to  admit,  found,

1  The  full  discussion  of  a  subject  of  such  unspeakable  importance  in  all  its
bearings  would  require  a  separate  work.


Ancient  Jewish   Theological  Literature.       295

alas  !  scarcely  any  parallel  in  the  teaching  of  Rabbinism  :  it
was  that  of  a  suffering  Messiah.  Hints  indeed  there  were,
as  certain  passages  in  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  could  not  be
wholly  ignored  or  misrepresented,  even  by  Rabbinical  inge-
nuity, just  as  the  doctrine  of  vicarious  suffering  and  substi-
tution could  not  be  eliminated  from  the  practical  teaching  of
the  confession  of  sins  over  the  sacrifices,  when  the  worshipper
day  by  day  laid  his  hands  upon,  and  transferred  to  them
his  guilt.  Yet  Judaism,  except  in  the  case  of  the  few,  saw
not  in  all  this  that  to  which  alone  it  could  point  as  its  real
meaning  :  "  The  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of
the  world."

And  now,  as  century  after  century  has  passed,  and  the  glad
some  Gospel  message  has  been  carried  from  nation  to  nation,
while  Israel  is  still  left  in  the  darkness  of  its  unbelief  and  the
misery  of  its  mistaken  hope,  we  seem  to  realise  with  ever
increasing  force  that  "The  people  that  walked  in  darkness
have  seen  a  great  light :  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the
shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined."  Yes :
"  unto  us  a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given  :  and  the
government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder :  and  His  Name
shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  mighty  God,
The  Everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace  "  (Isa.  ix.  2y  6).
For  assuredly,  "  God  hath  not  cast  away  His  people  which
He  foreknew."  But  "  all  Israel  shall  be  saved :  as  it  is
written,  There  shall  come  out  of  Sion  the  Deliverer,  and
shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob  "  (Rom.  xi.  2,  26).
"  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  Watchman,  what  of  the
night  ?  The  watchman  said,  The  morning  cometh,  and  also
the  night"  (Isa.  xxi.  11,  12}.


APPENDIX   1.


MASSECHETH  MIDDOTH.

(Being  the  Mishnic  Tractate  descriptive  of  the  Measurements  of  the

Temple.)

Middoth  is  the  tenth  Tractate  of  Seder  V.  (Jfodashim)  of  the  Mishnah.  It  has  no
Gemara  either  in  the  Jerusalem  or  the  Babylon  Talmud.  In  the  former  the
whole  of  Seder  V.  is  awanting  ;  in  the  latter  only  two  and  a-half  Tractates
(half  Tamid,  Middoth,  and  Kinnim).  Middoth  contains  Halachah  only  in  the
following  passages  :  i.  2,  3,  9  ;  ii.  2,  4,  5,  6 ;  iii.  3,  5,  8 ;  iv.  2,  5  ;  v.  3,  4.
Throughout  the  Mishnah  the  names  of  128  sages  are  introduced.  Of  those
mentioned  in  this  Tractate  almost  all  witnessed  the  destruction  of  the  Temple.

PEREK  I.

1.  The  priests  kept  watch  in  the  Temple  in  three  places :  in  the
house  Avtinas,  and  in  the  house  Nitsuts,  and  in  the  house  of  Moked ;
and  the  Levites  in  twenty-one  places  :    5  at  the  five  gates  leading
into   the   Temple   (the   Mountain    of  the   House),   4   in   the   four
angles  within,  5  at  the  five  gates  of  the  court,  4  in  its  four  angles
without,  and   i   in  the  chamber  of  offering,  and  i   in  the  chamber
of  the  vail,  and  i  behind  the   Most   Holy  Place   (the   House   of
Atonement).

2.  The  Captain  ot  the  Temple  (the  man  of  the  Temple  Mount)
visited  each  guard,  and   burning   torches  were  carried  before  him.
And  every  guard  which  did  not  stand  up  (which  was  not  standing)
the  Captain  of  the  Temple  said  to  him  :  "  Peace  be  to  thee."     If


298  Appendix  I.

he  observed  that  he  slept,  he  smote  him  with  his  stick,  and  he  hac
authority  to  burn  his  dress.  And  they  said,  "  What  is  the  noise  (voice)
in  the  court?  "  "  It  is  the  noise  of  a  Levite  who  is  beaten,  and  his
clothes  are  set  on  fire,  because  he  slept  upon  his  watch."  Rabbi
Eliezer,  the  son  of  Jacob,  said  :  "  On  one  occasion  they  found  the
brother  of  my  mother  sleeping,  and  they  burned  his  dress."

3.  There  were  five  gates  to  the  Temple  inclosure  (Temple  Mount)
the  two  gates  of  Huldah  from  the  south,  which  served  for  entrance
and  for  exit ;  Kipponos  from  the  west ;  Tadi  from  the  north — it
did  not  serve  for  anything;  the  eastern   gate,  upon  which  was  a
representation  of  the  city  of  Shushan,  and  by  it  the  high-priest  who
burned  the  Red  Heifer,  and  all  who  assisted,  went   out  upon  the
Mount  of  Olives.

4.  There  were  seven  gates  in  the  court ;  three  on  the  north,  and
three  on  the  south,  and  one  in  the  east.     That  in  the  south  was  the
gate  of  burning ;  second  to  it,  the  gate  of  the  firstborn  ;  third  to  it,  the
water  gate.     That  in  the  east  was  the  gate  of  Nicanor,  and  two
chambers  belonged  to  it,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  one  on  the
left — the  one  the  chamber  of  Phineas,  the  wardrobe  keeper,  and  the
other  the  chamber  of  those  who  made  the  pancake  offering.1

5.  And  that  on  the  north  was  the  gate  Nitsuts,  and  it  was  after  the
form  of  an  Exhedra,  and  an  Alijah  was  built  on  the  top  of  it ;  and
the  priests  kept  guard  above,  and  the  Levites  below,  and  it  had  a
door  to  the  Chel.     Second  to  it  was  the  gate  of  offering  ;  third  to  it
the  Beth  Moked.

6.  And  four  rooms  were  in   the   Beth   Moked,  like  small    bed
chambers2  opening  on  a  dining  apartment ;  two  in  the  place  that  was
holy,  and  two  in  that  which  was  not  holy,  and  the  heads  of  the  beams3
separated  between  that  ivhich  was  holy  and  that  which  was  not  holy.
And  for  what   did  they  serve  ?    That  on  the  south-west  was   the
chamber  of  offering ;  that  on  the  south-east  the  chamber  of  the  shew-

1  For  the  daily  offering  of  the  high -priest.

*  In  the  original  :   Kaitunoth   (evidently  the    Greek  KOIT&V)  opening   upon   a
Ttraklin,  evidently  the  Triclinium.  3  Roshe  Pasfassin.


Massecheth  Middotk.  299

bread  ;  on  the  north-east,  there  the  Asmoneans  deposited  the  stones
of  the  altar  which  the  King  of  Javan  had  defiled  ;  on  the  north-west,
there  they  went  down  to  the  bath-house.

7.  There  were  two  gates  to  the  Beth  Moked — one  opened  upon
the  Chel,  the  other  upon  the  court.     Rabbi  Jehudah  says  :  "  That
which  opened  upon  the  court  had  a  small  wicket  by  which  they  went
in  to  explore  the  court."

8.  The  Beth  Moked  was  arched,  and  was  a  great  house  surrounded
by  extensions  (perhaps  terraces)  of  stone,  and  the  elders  of  the  house
of  their  fathers  slept  there,  and  the  keys   of  the  court  in  their  hand  ;
and  the  young  priests,  every  one  with  his  pillow  on  the  ground
(perhaps  his  dress).

9.  And  there  was  a  place  there,  a  cubit  by  a  cubit,  and  a  slab  of
marble,  and  a  ring  was  fastened  on  it,  and  the  chain  with  the  keys
were  hung  thereon.     When  the  time  came  for  closing,  he  lifted  the
slab  by  the  ring,  and  took  the  keys  from  the  chain,  and  the  priest
closed  the  gates  from  within,  and  the  Levite  had  to  sleep  without.
When  he  had  finished  closing,  he  returned  the  keys  to  the  chain,  and
the  slab  to  its  place ;  he  placed  his  pillow  upon  it  and  slept  there.     If
an  accident  befell  one  of  them,  he  went  out  and  had  to  go  by  the
winding  stair1  which  went  under  the  house,  and  lights  were  burning
on  either  side,  till  he  came  to  the  bath-house.    Rabbi  Eliezer,  the  son
of  Jacob,  said  :  "  By  the  winding  stairs  he  passed  under  the  Chel,
and  went  out  and  had  to  go  through  Tadi."


PEREK  II.

i.  The  Temple  inclosure  (the  Temple  Mount)  was  500  cubits  by
500  cubits ;  it  was  largest  on  the  south ;  next  largest  on  the  east ;
then  on  the  north  ;  smallest  on  the  west.  The  place  where  there  was
most  measurement  there  was  also  most  service.

1  Mesibbah,  literally,  that  which  goes  round  about.


300  Appendix  /.

2.  All  who  entered  the  Temple  inclosure  entered  by  the  right,
and  turned  and  went  out  by  the  left,  except  those  whom  something1
had  befallen,  who  turned  to  the  left.     "What  ails  thee  that  thou
turnest  to  the    left  ?  "      "  Because  I  am  a  mourner."      "  He  that
dwelleth  in  this  house  comfort  thee !  "     "  Because  I  am  under  the
bann."     "  He  that  dwelleth  in  this  house  put  it  in  their  hearts,  that
they  restore   thee  ! "     So   Rabbi  Meir.     Rabbi  Jose  says   to  him,
"This  would  make  it,  as  if  they  had  transgressed   against  him  in
judgment;  but  rather :  '  He  that  dwelleth  in  this  house  put  it  in  thy
heart,  that  thou   hearken  to  the  words  of  thy  brethren,   and   they
restore  thee.' "

3.  Farther  on  was  the  Sorag,  ten  handbreadths  high.    And  thirteen
breaches  were  in  it,  which  the  Kings  of  Javan  had  made.     They
restored  and  strengthened  it,  and  they  decreed  towards  them  thirteen
obeisances  [in  remembrance\.     Again  farther  on  the  Chel,  ten  cubits ;
and  twelve  steps  were  there ;  the  step  half  a  cubit  high,  and  half  a
cubit  in  extension.     All  the  steps  which  were  there,  each  step  was
half  a  cubit  high,  and  the  extension  half  a  cubit,  except  those  which
were  at  the  porch.    All  the  doorways  and  gates  which  were  there,  were
twenty  cubits  high,  and  ten  cubits  wide,  except  that  in  the  porch.
All  the  doorways  which  were  there,  had  doors,  except  that  in  the
porch.    All  the  gates  which  were  there,  had  lintels,  except  that  in  the
gate  Tadi,  which  had  two  stones  resting,  this  on  the  back  of  that.
All  the  gates  which  were  there,  were  renewed  to  be  with  gold,  except
the  gate  of  Nicanor,  because  there  was  wrought  upon  them  a  miracle,
and  some  say,  because  the  brass  sparkled.

4.  All  the  walls  which  were  there  were  high,  except  the  wall  in
the  east,   so  that  the   priest  who  burned   the  heifer,   standing   on
the  top  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and   directing  himself  to  look,
saw  through  the  gateway  of  the  sanctuary,  at  the  time  when  he
sprinkled  the  blood.

5.  The  Court  of  the  Women  was  135  cubits  long  by  135  cubits
broad,  and  four  chambers  were  in  the  four  angles,  each  40  cubits

1  So  literally  (Davar).     Of  course,  not  the  same  expression  as  in  i.  9.


Massecheth  Middoth.  301

square,  and  they  were  not  roofed  in.  And  so  they  are  intended  to  be,
as  it  is  said:  "And  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  outer  court,  and
caused  me  to  pass  by  the  four  corners  of  the  court,  and  behold,  in
every  corner  of  the  court  a  court.  In  the  four  corners  of  the  court
courts  smoking"1 ...  //  is  said,  they  were  "smoking,"  and  that
because  they  were  not  roofed.  And  for  what  did  they  serve  ?  That
on  the  south-east  was  the  chamber  of  the  Nazarites,  where  the
Nazarites  washed  their  peace-offerings,  and  polled  their  hair,  and
threw  it  under  the  pot.  That  on  the  north-east  was  the  wood  cham-
ber, where  the  priests  who  were  disqualified  picked  the  wood,  and
every  stick  in  which  a  worm  was  found,  it  was  unfitted  for  the  altar.
That  on  the  north-west  was  the  chamber  of  the  lepers.  That  on  the
south-west  Rabbi  Eliezer,  the  son  of  Jacob,  said  :  "I  have  forgotten
for  what  it  served."  Abba  Shaul  said :  "  There  they  put  the  wine
and  the  oil ;  it  was  called  the  chamber  of  the  house  of  Schamanyah."
And  it  [the  wall]  was  at  first  flush,  and  they  surrounded  it  with  a
gallery,  so  that  the  women  looked  from  above  and  the  men  from
beneath,  for  the  purpose  that  they  might  not  be  mixed  together.
And  fifteen  steps  went  up  from  there  to  the  Court  of  Israel,  like  the
fifteen  degrees  in  the  Psalms  [Songs  of  Degrees  in  the  Psalms].  Upon
these  the  Levites  stood  singing  the  songs.  They  were  not  rectangular
but  rounded,  like  the  arc  of  a  rounded  substance.

6.  And  there  were  chambers  beneath  the  Court  of  Israel,  and  they
opened  upon  the  Court  of  the  Women.  There  the  Levites  placed
their  harps,  and  their  psalteries,  and  their  cymbals,  and  all  the  musical
instruments.  The  Court  of  Israel  was  135  cubits  long  by  n  broad,
and  similarly,  the  Court  of  the  Priests  was  135  long  by  n  broad,
and  the  heads  of  the  beams  divided  between  the  Court  of  Israel  and
the  Court  of  the  Priests.  Rabbi  Eliezer,  the  son  of  Jacob,  said :
"  There  was  a  step,  a  cubit  high,  and  upon  it  the  Duchan  was  placed,
and  on  it  were  three  steps,  each  half  a  cubit.  It  results,  that  the
Court  of  the  Priests  was  2%  cubits  higher  than  that  of  Israel.  The
entire  court  was  187  cubits  long  and  135  cubits  broad.  Thirteen
1  Ezek.  xlvi.  21,  22.


302  Appendix  L

obeisances  took  place  there.  Abba  Jose,  the  son  of  Chanan,  said  :
"  Towards  the  thirteen  gates."  The  southern  were :  nearest  to  the
west,  the  upper  gate,  then  the  gate  of  burning,  the  gate  of  the  first-
born, and  the  water-gate.  And  why  was  its  name  called  the  water-
gate?  Because  through  it  they  brought  the  pitcher  of  water  for
pouring  out  for  the  "  Feast  of  Tabernacles."  Rabbi  Eliezer,  the  son
of  Jacob,  said  :  "  And  by  it  the  waters  were  flowing  down,  with  the
direction  of  coming  out  below  the  threshold  of  the  Temple."  And
opposite  to  them  to  the  north  were  :  (nearest  to  the  west)  the  gate  of
Jeconiah,  the  gate  of  offering,  the  gate  of  the  women,  and  the  gate  of
the  song.  And  why  was  it  called  the  gate  of  Jeconiah  ?  Because  by
it  Jeconiah  went  out  into  captivity.  That  on  the  east  was  the  gate
of  Nicanor,  and  it  had  two  wickets,  one  on  its  right  and  the  other  on
its  left.  And  there  were  two  [gates]  to  the  west ;  they  had  no  name.


PEREK   III.

i.  The  altar  was  32  by  32  [cubits].  Upwards  i  cubit,  and  contract
i  cubit :  that  was  the  base.  Remain  30  by  30.  Upwards  5,  and
contract  i  cubit :  that  was  the  circuit  Remain  28  by  28.  The
place  of  the  horns,  a  cubit  on  this  side  and  a  cubit  on  that
side.  Remain  26  by  26.  The  place  for  the  tread  of  the
priests,  a  cubit  on  this  side  and  a  cubit  on  that  side.  Remain
24  by  24 :  the  place  where  the  sacrifice  was  laid  out  Rabbi  Jose
.said  :  "At  the  first  it  was  only  28  by  28;  though  it  contracted  and
went  up,  according  to  this  measurement,  until  there  remained  the
place  for  laying  the  sacrifices :  20  by  20.  But  when  the  children
of  the  Captivity  came  up,  they  added  to  it  4  cubits  on  the  south
And  4  on  the  west  like  a  gamma,  because  it  is  said,  'And  Ariel
.hall  be  12  cubits  long  by  12  broad,  square.'1  That  does  not  mean

1  Ezek.  xliii.  16,  "  Ariel"  =  the  lion  of  God  =  the  altar.


Massecheth  Middoth.  303

that  it  was  only  12  by  12,  since  it  is  added:  *  In  the  four  corner
thereof,  to  teach  that  it  measured  from  the  middle  12  cubits  in
every  direction."  And  a  scarlet  line  girdled  it  in  the  middle  to
separate  between  the  upper  and  the  lower  blood-sprinklings.  And
the  base  ran  round  all  the  north  and  all  the  west  side,  but  was
shortened  a  cubit  on  the  south  and  on  the  east.

2.  In  the   south-western   angle   were   two  apertures,    like  small
nostrils,  and  the  blood,  poured  on  the  base  to  the  west,  and  on
the  base  to  the  south,  descended  through  them,  and  co-mingled  in
the  canal,  and  flowed  out  into  the  brook  Kedron.

3.  Below  in  the  pavement,  in  that  angle,  there  was  a  place,  a
cubit  by  a  cubit,  with  a  tablet  of  marble,  and  a  ring  was  fastened  in
it,  and  here  they  went  down  into  the  sewer  to  cleanse  it.     And  there
was  a  sloping  ascent  to  the  south  of  the  altar,  32  cubits  long  by  16
broad,  and  it  had  a  pit  at  its  west  side,  into  which  they  put  sin-
offerings  of  birds  that  were  defiled.

4.  Both  the  stones  of  the  sloping  ascent  and  those  of  the  altar
were  from  the  valley  of  Beth  Cherem.     And  they  dug  beneath  the
virgin  soil,  and  brought  out  from  it  undamaged  (whole)  stones,  upon
which  iron  had  not  been  lifted,  because  iron  defiles  everything  by
contact,  and  by  scratching.     One  of  the  stones  was  scratched :  it
was  defiled ;  but  the  rest  were  lawful  for  use.     And  they  whitened
them  twice  in  the  year,  once  at  the  Passover,  and  once  at  the  Feast
of  Tabernacles  ;  and  the  Sanctuary  once  at  the  Passover.     Rabbi l
says  :  "  On  the  eve  of  every  Sabbath  they  whitened  it  with  a  cloth,
on  account  of  the  blood-sprinklings."     They  did  not  plaster  it  with
an  iron  trowel,  lest  it  might  touch,  and  defile.     For  the  iron  is  created
to  shorten  the  days  of  man,  and  the  altar  is  created  to  lengthen  the
days  of  man,  therefore  it  is  not  right  that  that  which  shortens  should
be  lifted  upon  that  which  lengthens.

5.  And  rings  were  to  the  north  of  the  altar :  six  rows,  each  of
four ;  but  some  say,  four  rows,  each  of  six ;   and  in  these  they
slaughtered  the  holy  sacrifices.     The  house  (place)  of  slaughtering

1  The  Rabbi,  i.e.  R.  Jehudah  the  Holy.


304  Appendix  /.

was  to  the  north  of  the  altar.  And  there  were  eight  short  pillars1  and
squares  of  cedar  upon  the  top  of  them,  and  hooks  of  iron  were
fastened  in  them,  and  three  rows  were  upon  each  of  them,  upon
which  they  hung  up,  and  they  skinned  upon  marble  tables  which
were  between  the  pillars.

6.  And   the   laver  was   between   the   porch  and   the  altar,  and
inclined  nearer  towards  the  south.     Between  the    porch  and   the
altar  were  22  cubits,  and  12  steps  were  there,  each  step  half  a  cubit
high,  and  its  extension  a  cubit — a  cubit,  a  cubit,  and  then  an  exten-
sion of  three  (cubits) ;    and  a  cubit,  a  cubit,  and  an  extension  of
three ;  and  the  topmost,  a  cubit,  a  cubit,  and  an  extension  of  four
(cubits).     Rabbi  Jehudah  said  :  "  The  topmost  a  cubit,  a  cubit,  and
an  extension  of  five  (cubits).  "

7.  The  doorway  to  the  porch  was  40  cubits  high  and  20  broad,
and  five  beams  of  ash   were  upon  the  top  of  it ;  the  lowest  pro-
truded over  the  doorway  a  cubit  on  this  and  a  cubit  on  that  side  ;
that  above  it  protruded  over  it  a  cubit  on  this  and  a  cubit  on  that
side;  it  results,  that  the  topmost   [was]  30  cubits,  and  a  buttress
of  stones  was  between  each  one  of  them.

8.  And  supports  of  cedar  were  fixed  from  the  wall  of  the  Sanc-
tuary to  the  wall  of  the  porch,  lest  they  should  bulge ;  and  chains  of
gold  were  fixed  in  the  roof  of  the  porch,  and  by  them  the  young
priests  mounted,  to  look  at  the  crowns,  as  it  is  written:2  "And
crowns  shall  be  to  Helem,  and  to  Tobijah,  and  to  Jedaiah,  and  to  Hen
the  son  of  Zephaniah,  for  a  memorial  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord." 3
A  vine  of  gold  was  standing  over  the  entrance  to  the  Sanctuary,
and  was  suspended  on  the  top  of  beams.     Every  one  who  vowed  a
leaf,  or  a  berry,  or  a  bunch,  brought  it,  and  hung  it  up  there.    Rabbi
Eliezer,  the  son  of  Rabbi  Zadok,  said  :  "  It  happened  (that  they  had
to  remove  it)  and  there  were  numbered  for  it  300  priests."  *

1  Nannasin,  evidently  the  Greek  vdvos.

*  Malteraoth  shel  Milah — Malterah  or  Ammaltera,  from  the  Greek  pf\a6pot>  •
Milah,  the  Greek  fj.e\la.

3  Zech.  vi.  14.  4  To  remove  or  to  cleanse  it.


Massecheth  Middoth.  305


PEREK  IV.

r.  The  entrance  to  the  Sanctuary  was  20  cubits  high,  and  10
cubits  broad ;  and  it  had  four  doors  [two  folding-doors]  :  two  within
and  two  without,  as  it  is  said  :  "  And  the  Sanctuary  and  the  Holy
Place  had  two  doors." l  The  outer  doors  opened  to  the  inside  of  the
doorway,  to  cover  the  thickness  of  the  wall,  and  the  inner  doors
opened  inwards  into  the  house,  to  cover  behind  the  doors.  For,
the  whole  house  was  covered  with  gold,  except  behind  the  doors.
Rabbi  Jehudah  said  :  "  They  [both  pairs  of  doors]  stood  within  the
entrance,  and  were  like  Azteramita?  and  they  folded  backwards—
these  2 \  cubits,  and  those  2 \  cubits.  Half  a  cubit  the  door-post  from
this  [corner],  and  half  a  cubit  the  door-post  from  that,  and  so  it  it
said  :  '  And  the  doors  had  two  leaves  alike,  two  turning-leaves ;  twd
for  the  one  door,  and  two  leaves  for  the  other.'"3

2.  And  the  great  gate  had  two  wickets,  one  to  the  north  and  one  to
the  south.     That  to  the  south,  no  man  ever  passed  through  it ;  and
to  this  clearly  refers  what  is  said  in  Ezekiel,  as  it  is  written  :  "  Then
the  Lord  said  unto  me,  This  gate   shall  be  shut,  it  shall  not  be
opened,  and  no  man  shall  enter  in  by  it ;  because  the  Lord,  the
God  of  Israel,  hath  entered  in  by  it,  therefore  it  shall  be  shut." 4
He  took  the  key,  and  opened  the  wicket,  and  entered  the  little
chamber  (atrium),  and  from  the  little  chamber  into  the  Sanctuary.
Rabbi  Jehudah  said  :  "  Along  the  thickness  of  the  wall  he  walked, 6
until   he  found   himself  standing  between  the  two  gates,  and  ha
opened  the  outer  one  from  within  and  the  inner  one  from  without."

3.  And  thirty-eight  little  chambers  were  there — fifteen  on  the  north,
fifteen  on  the  south,  and  eight  on  the  west.    On  the  north  and  on  thf

1  Ezek.  xli.  23.  9-

1  The  term,    which  seems  not  to   have  been  quite  understood  even  in   Tal-
mudical  times,  is  rendered  by  Jost :  twisted  leaf,  and  derived  from  <rTpe</>«.

3  Ezek.  xli.  24.  4  Ezek.  xliv.  2.

6  It  is,  however,  supposed  by  some  to  refer  to  a  kind  of  passage  through  the
walL

X


306  Appendix  I.

south,  five  on  the  top  of  five,  and  five  on  their  top ;  and  on  the  west
three  on  the  top  of  three,  and  two  on  the  top  of  them.  And  each
one  of  them  had  three  entrances,  one  to  the  little  chamber  on  the
right,  and  one  to  the  little  chamber  on  the  left,  and  one  to  the  little
chamber  on  the  top.  And  at  the  north-western  corner  were  five
entrances,  one  to  the  little  chamber  at  the  right,  and  the  other  to  the
little  chamber  on  the  top,  and  another  to  the  winding-stair,  and
another  to  the  wicket,  and  another  to  the  Sanctuary.

4.  And  the  lowermost  (chamber)  was  5  cubits,  and  the  roofing  (exten-
sion, platitude)  6;  the  middle  (chamber)  6,  and  the  roofing  7;  and  the
uppermost  7,  as  it  is  said  :  "  The  nethermost  chamber  was  5  cubits
broad,  and  the  middle  6  cubits  broad,  and  the  third  7  cubits  broad,
for  he  made  rebatements  in  the  '  house '  round  about  without,  that
[the  beams]  should  not  be  fastened  within  the  walls  of  the  house."  l

5.  And  a  winding-stair  went  up  from  the  north-eastern  angle  to
the  north-western  angle,  by  which  they  went  up  to  the  roofs  of  the
chambers.      One  went  up  the  winding-stair  with  his  face  to  the  west,
and  went  all  along  the  north  side,  until  he  came  to  the  west.  He  came
to  the  west,  and  turned  his  face  to  the  south,  and  went  all  along  the
west  side  till  he  came  to  the  south.  He  came  to  the  south,  and  turned
his  face  eastwards,  and  went  along  the  south  side,  till  he  came  to  the
entrance  of  the  Alijah;  for  the  entrance  to  the  Alijah  opened  to  the
south,  and  in  the  entrance  to  the  Alijah  were  two  beams  of  cedar,
by  which  they  went  up  to  the  roof  of  the  Alijah,  and  the  heads  of  the
beams2  divided  in  the  Alijah  between  the  Holy  Place  and  the  Most
Holy  Place.     And  trap-doors  opened  in  the  Alijah   into  the  Most
Holy  Place,  by  which  they  let  down  the  workmen  in  chests,  that
they  might  not  feast  their  eyes  in  the  Most  Holy  Place.

6.  And  the  Sanctuary  was  100  by  100,  by  100  high;  the  solid
foundation  6  cubits,  and  the  height  upon  it  40  cubits;    i    cubit,
decorated  scroll ;  2  cubits,  the  place  for  the  water-droppings  ;  i  cubit
covering,    and  i  cubit  pavement,  and  the  height  of  the  Alijah  40
cubits,   and    i    cubit   scroll-work,  and   2   cubits   the  place   for  the

1  i  Kings  vi.  6,  *  Roshe  Paspassiti,


Massecheth  Middoth.  307

dropping,  and  i  cubit  covering,  and  i  cubit  pavement,  and  3  cubits
balustrade,  and  i  cubit  scare-raven.  Rabbi  Jehudah  said :  "  The
scare-raven  was  not  counted  from  the  measurement,  but  the  balus-
trade was  4  cubits."

7.  From  the  east  to  the  west  100  cubits — the  wall  of  the  porch  5,
and  the  porch  1 1 ;  the  wall  of  the  Sanctuary  6,  and  its  interior  space
40  cubits,  i  cubit  intermediate  wall,  and  20  cubits  the  Most  Holy
Place,  the  wall  of  the  Sanctuary  6,  and  the  little  chamber  6,  and  the
wall  of  the  little  chamber  5.  From  the  north  to  the  south  70  cubits
— the  wall  of  the  winding-stair  5,  and  the  winding-stair  3,  the  wall
of  the  little  chamber  5,  and  the  little  chamber  6,  the  wall  of  the
Sanctuary  6,  and  its  interior  space  20  cubits,  the  wall  of  the  Sanctuary
6,  and  the  little  chamber  6,  and  the  wall  of  the  little  chamber  5,  and
the  place  for  the  going  down  of  the  water  3  cubits,  and  the  wall
5  cubits.  The  porch  protruded  beyond  it,  15  cubits  from  the  north
and  15  cubits  from  the  south,  and  it  was  called  the  house  of  the
sacrificial  knives,  because  there  they  deposited  the  knives.  And  the
Sanctuary  was  narrow  behind  and  wide  in  front,  and  like  to  a  lion,
as  it  is  said  :  "  O  Ariel,  the  lion  of  God,  the  city  where  David
dwelt."1  As  the  lion  is  narrow  behind  and  wide  in  front,  so  is  the
Sanctuary  narrow  behind  and  wide  in  its  front.


PEREK  V.

1.  The  whole  court  was   187  cubits  long  by  135  cubits  broad.
From  the  east  to  the  west   187  :  the  place  for  the  tread  of  Israel
1 1  cubits ;  the  place  for  the  tread  of  the  priests  1 1  cubits ;  the  altar
32;  between  the  porch  and  the  altar  22  cubits;  the  Sanctuary  100
cubits  ;  and  1 1  cubits  behind  the  house  of  Atonement.

2.  From  the  north  to  the  south   135  cubits :  the  altar  and  the
circuit  62 ;  from  the  altar  to  the  rings  8  cubits ;  the  place  of  the

1  Isa.  xxix.  I.


308  Appendix  /.

rings  24  cubits  ;  from  the  rings  to  the  tables  4 ;  from  the  tables  to
the  pillars  4 ;  from  the  pillars  to  the  wall  of  the  court  8  cubits ;  and
the  rest  between  the  circuit  and  the  wall,  and  the  place  of  the
pillars.

3.  There  were  six  rooms  in  the  court — three  to  the  north,  and
three  to   the  south.      Those  on  the   north :    the  salt-chamber,  the
chamber  Parvah,  the  chamber  of  those  who  washed  out.     The  salt-
chamber  :   there   they  put  salt  to   the   offering.     The   chamber  of
Parvah :  there  they  salted  the  skins  of  the  holy  sacrifices,  and  on
the  roof  was  the   bath-house  of  the    high-priest  on    the    Day  of
Atonement.     The  chamber  of  those  who  washed  out,  where   they
washed  the  inwards  of  the  holy  things,  and  thence  a  winding-stair
went  up  to  the  roof  of  the  house  of  Parvah.

4.  Those  on  the  south  :  the  wood-chamber,  the  chamber  of  the
captivity,  the  chamber  of  "  hewn  stones."    The  wood-chamber — said
Rabbi  Eliezer,  the  son  of  Jacob :   "  I  have  forgotten  for  what  it
served."     Abba  Shaul  said  :    "  It  was  the    chamber  of    the  high-
priest,  and  it  lay  behind  the  other  two,  and  a  roof  was  extended
over  the  three  (they  had  one  common  roof).     The  chamber  of  the
captivity  :  a  well  was  there  which  they  of  the  captivity  had  digged,
md  a  wheel  was  placed  upon  it,  and  thence  they  provided  water  for
ihe  whole  court.     The  chamber  of  "  hewn  stones  : "  there  the  great
Sanhedrim  of  Israel  sat,  and  judged  the  priesthood.     And  the  priest
in  whom  was  found  disqualification  was  clothed  in  black,  and  veiled
in  black,  and  went  out,  and  had  to  go.     And  if  there  was  not  found
in  him  disqualification,  he  was  dressed  in  white,  and  veiled  in  white ;
he  went  in  and  served  with  his  brethren  the  priests.     And  they  made
a  feast-day,  because  there  was  not  found  disqualification  in  the  seed
of  Aaron  the  priest,  and  thus  spake  they  :  "  Blessed  be  God,1  blessed
be  He,  that  there  has  not  been  found  disqualification  in  the  seed  of
Aaron,  and  blessed  be  He  Who  has  chosen  Aaron  and  his  sons,  to
stand  to  serve  before  the  face  of  the  Lord  in  the  Most  Holy  House."

1  The  expression  here  is  Makom,  literally  "  the  place,"  in  the  same  sense  in
which  T«hroj  is  used  by  Philo.


APPENDIX  II.

EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  BABYLON  TALMUD.

Massecheth  Berachoth,  or  Tractate  on  Benedictions.

Berachoth  is  the  first  Tractate  of  the  first  Seder  (Seraim,  which  consists  of  eleven
Tractates).  It  contains  nine  Perakim,  which  successively  explain  the  duty,
the  exceptions,  the  posture,  the  formulas,  and  the  controversies  in  regard  to
prayer.  The  Tractate  exists  both  in  the  Jerusalem  and  in  the  Babylon
Talmud.  The  great  Maimonides  has  prefaced  the  Seder  Seraim  by  a  General
Introduction,  which  presents  a  general  view  of  Talmudism,  and  explains  what
is  of  greatest  importance  to  the  student.  Notwithstanding  his  vast  learning
and  authority,  incompleteness  and  inaccuracies  have,  however,  been  pointed
out  in  his  Introduction.

Mishnah. — From  what  time  is  the  "  Shema  " l  said  in  the  evening  ?
From  the  hour  that  the  priests  entered  to  eat  of  their  therumah2
until  the  end  of  the  first  night  watch.3  These  are  the  words  of  Rabbi
Eliezer.  But  the  sages  say  :  Till  midnight.  Rabban  Gamaliel  says :
Until  the  column  of  the  morning  (the  dawn)  rises.  It  happened,  that
his  sons  came  back  from  a  banquet.  They  said  to  him  :  "  We  have
not  said  the  '  Shema.' "  He  said  to  them,  "  If  the  column  of  the
morning  has  not  come  up,  you  are  bound  to  say  it."  And  not  only
this  have  they  said,  but,  wherever  the  sages  have  said  "  till  mid-
night," their  command  applies  till  the  morning  column  rises.  The

1  The  well-known  prayer,  beginning  ' '  Hear,  O  Israel. "

8  The  heave-offering  given  to  the  priests,  which  they  ate  within  the  Temple.

•  The  Jews  divided  the  night  into  three  watches.


3io  Appendix  II.

burning  of  the  fat  and  of  the  members  (of  sacrifices)  is  lawful  till  the
morning  column  rise  ;l  and  so  everything  which  is  to  be  eaten  on  the
same  day  (on  which  it  has  been  offered)  is  allowed  to  be  eaten  till
the  rise  of  the  morning  column.  If  so,  why  do  the  sages  say,  "  till
midnight  ?  "  In  order  to  keep  a  man  far  from  transgressing.

Gemara. —  ..........

Fol.  3  a.  To  the  end  of  the  night  watch.— How  does  Rabbi
Eliezer  mean  this  ?  If  he  means  that  the  night  has  three  watches,
he  should  say  till  four  hours ;  and  if  he  means  that  the  night  has
four  watches,  he  should  say  till  three  hours.  Indeed,  he  means
that  the  night  has  three  watches,  but  he  indicates  by  the  expres-
sion that  there  are  night  watches  in  heaven,  as  there  are  night
watches  upon  earth.  For  we  have  this  doctrine  :  Rabbi  Eliezer
says,  There  are  three  night  watches  in  the  night,  and  in  every
one  of  these  night  watches  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  His  Name,
sits  and  roars  like  a  lion.  For  it  is  written  (Jeremiah  xxv.  30),
1  'Jehovah  shall  roar  from  on  high,  from  the  habitation  of  His
holiness  shall  He  give  out  His  voice;  roaring  shall  He  roar  on
account  of  His  habitation."2  The  signs  of  this  thing  are  as
follows  :  In  the  first  night  watch  the  ass  brays,  in  the  second  the
dogs  bark,  in  the  third  the  suckling  sucks  his  mother,  and  the  wife
speaks  to  her  husband.  How  does  Rabbi  Eliezer  indicate  them  ?
Does  he  thus  indicate  the  commencement  of  the  night  watch  ?  The
commencement  of  the  first  night  watch,  what  need  is  there  for  a
sign  of  it,  seeing  it  is  night  ?  Or  does  he  refer  to  the  end  of  the
night  watch  ?  For  the  end  of  the  last  night  watch,  why  does  he  give
me  a  sign,  seeing  it  is  day  ?  But  he  indicates  the  end  of  the  first
night  watch  and  the  commencement  of  the  last  night  watch,  and  the
middle  of  the  middle  night  watch.  And  if  thou  wilt,  I  will  say  that
he  refers  in  all  to  the  end  of  the  night  watches.  And  if  thou
sayest,  the  last  does  not  require  it,  what  is  attained  by  it?  The

1  That  is,  they  may  be  left  to  consume  on  the  altar  from  the  time  of  evening
sacrifice  till  then.

3  So  literally  in  the  Hebrew.


Specimens  from,  the  Talmud.  3 1  i

reading  of  the  "Shema"  for  him  who  sleeps  in  a  dark  house,  and
does  not  know  the  time  for  saying  the  li  Shema  "  when  it  is,  so  that,
when  the  woman  speaks  with  her  husband  and  the  babe  sucks  its
mother,  he  may  rise  up  and  say  the  prayer.

Rabbi  Isaac,  the  son  of  Samuel,  says,  in  the  name  of  Rab,  "  The
night  has  three  watches,  and  hi  each  one  of  these  watches  does  the
Holy  One,  blessed  be  His  Name,  sit  and  roar  like  a  lion,  and  say,
1  Woe  to  the  children,  because  on  account  of  their  sins  I  have  laid
desolate  My  house,  and  burned  My  temple,  and  have  driven  them
forth  among  the  nations  of  the  world.' "

We  have  this  doctrine  :  Rabbi  Jose  said,  "  On  one  occasion  I
was  travelling,  and  I  entered  into  one  of  the  ruins  of  Jerusalem  to
pray.  Then  came  Elijah — his  memory  be  for  good — and  waited  for
me  at  the  door  till  I  had  finished  my  prayer.  After  that  I  had
finished  my  prayer,  he  said  to  me,  ' Peace  be  to  thee,  Rabbi/  and  I
said  to  him,  '  Peace  be  to  thee,  Rabbi,  and  my  teacher.'  And  he
said  to  me,  '  My  son,  why  didst  thou  enter  into  this  ruin  ? '  I  said
to  him,  '  In  order  to  pray.'  And  he  said  to  me,  'Thou  mightest
have  prayed  on  the  road.'  And  I  said  to  him, '  I  was  afraid  that  those
who  passed  on  the  road  might  perhaps  interrupt  me.'  He  said  to
me,  '  Thou  shouldest  have  prayed  a  short  prayer.'  In  that  hour  I
learned  from  him  three  things.  I  learned  that  one  may  not  enter
into  a  ruin,  and  I  learned  that  one  may  pray  on  the  road,  and  1
learned  that  he  that  prays  on  the  road  should  pray  a  short  prayer.
He  also  said  to  me,  '  My  son,  what  voice  hast  thou  heard  in  that
ruin?'  And  I  said  to  him,  « I  have  heard  the  "Bath  Kol,"1  which
cooed  like  a  dove,  and  said,  "Woe  to  the  children,  because  on
account  of  their  sins  I  have  laid  waste  My  House,  and  I  have  burned
My  Sanctuary,  and  I  have  driven  them  forth  among  the  nations." '
And  he  said  to  me, '  By  thy  life,  and  by  the  life  of  thy  head,  not  only
at  that  time  did  the  voice  say  so,  but  every  day  three  times  does  it
say  so ;  and  not  only  this,  but  also  at  the  time  when  Israel  enters
the  house  of  prayer  and  the  house  of  study,  and  when  they  say,
1  Literally  "Daughter  Voice  " — the  voice  from  heaven.


312  Appendix  II.

"  Blessed  be  His  great  Name ;  "  then  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  His
Name,  moves  His  head,  and  says,  "  Happy  is  the  king  whom  they
thus  praise  in  His  house."  What  remains  to  the  father  who  has
driven  his  children  into  captivity  ?  and  woe  to  the  children  who  have
been  driven  forth  from  the  table  of  their  father/  "

The  Rabbis  teach  :  On  account  of  three  things  a  ruin  is  not  to  be
entered.  On  account  of  suspicion,1  and  on  account  of  falling  in  (of
the  wall),  and  on  account  of  evil  spirits.  On  account  of  suspicion —
does  it  not  suffice  on  account  of  falling  in  ?  (Would  that  not  have
been  alone  a  sufficient  ground  ?)  Fol.  3  b.  Not  if  it  is  recent.2  But
would  it  not  suffice  :  On  account  of  evil  spirits  ?  Not  when  there  are
two.3  If  there  are  two,  does  not  the  ground  of  suspicion  cease?
Not  if  the  two  are  impudent

The  Rabbis  taught :  The  night  has  four  watches.  These  are  the
words  of  Rabbi  (Jehudah  the  Holy).  Rabbi  Nathan  says  :  Three.
What  is  the  reason  of  Rabbi  Nathan  ?  Because  it  is  written  (Judges
vii.  19),  "  So  Gideon  came,  and  the  hundred  men  that  were  with  him,
unto  the  outside  of  the  camp,  in  the  beginning  of  the  middle  watch."
He  taught :  '  There  is  no  middle,  unless  there  is  one  before  and  one
after  it.  And  Rabbi,4  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  "  middle  ?  "'  (He
replied)  'One  of  the  middle  ones  among  the  middle  ones.'  And
Rabbi  Nathan,  *  Is  it  written  :  "  The  middle  of  the  middle  ones  ?"  It
is  only  written  the  middle  one.'  But  what  ground  has  Rabbi  ?  Rabbi
Serika  said,  that  Rabbi  Ami  said,  that  Rabbi  Joshua,  the  son  of
Levi,  said :  In  one  place  it  is  said  (Psalm  cxix.  62),  "  At  midnight  I
will  rise  to  give  thanks  unto  Thee,  because  of  Thy  righteous
judgments."  And  in  another  place  it  is  said  (verse  148),  u  Mine
eyes  prevent  the  night  watches."  How  is  this  ?  Because  the  night
has  four  watches.  And  Rabbi  Nathan?  He  interprets  it  just  as

1  Of  secret  sin.

2  If  it  has  only  lately  become  a  ruin,  since  then  there  would  be  no  immediate
lianger.

3  Because  where  there  are  two,  they  need  not  fear  evil  spirits.

4  This  is  Rabbi  Nathan's  challenge  to  R.  Jehudah.


Specimens  from  the  Talmud.  3 1 3

Rabbi  Joshua.  For  we  have  this  teaching  :  Rabbi  Joshua  says,  "To
three  hours  (into  the  day  the  'Shema'  may  be  said) ;  for  this  is  the  way
of  kings,  to  rise  at  three  hours  (after  daybreak).  Six  hours  of  the
night  (from  midnight  to  dawn  are  six  hours)  and  two  by  day  make
together  two  night  watches  "  (each  of  four  hours).  Rabbi  Ashi  says  :
"A  night  watch  and  a  half  might  also  be  called  night  watches." l

Rabbi  Serika  also  said,  that  Rabbi  Ami  said,  that  Rabbi  Joshua,
the  son  of  Levi,  said  :  "  You  must  not  speak  before  the  dead  anything
but  the  words  of  the  dead."  Rabbi  Aba,  the  son  of  Cahana,  said :
"  They  do  not  say  this  except  in  reference  to  the  words  of  the  law
(because  every  one  is  bound  to  take  part  in  such  conversation)  ;
but  as  to  ordinary  conversation  it  does  not  matter."  And  some
say,  Rabbi  Aba,  the  son  of  Cahana,  said,  "  They  do  not  say  this
merely  concerning  the  words  of  Scripture,  but  much  more  also  con-
cerning ordinary  conversation."

And  David  rose  at  midnight  (as  before  quoted).  Did  he  not  rise
in  the  evening?  since  it  is  written  (verse  147),  "I  prevented  the
gloaming,  and  cried."  And  how  do  we  know  that  this  gloaming  was
that  of  the  evening ?  Because  it  is  written  (Prov.  vii.  9) :  "In  the
gloaming,  in  the  evening  of  the  day,  in  the  denseness  of  the  night  and
of  darkness."  Rabbi  Oshja  said,  that  Rabbi  Acha  said,  So  spake
David  :  "  Never  has  the  middle  of  the  night  passed  over  me  in  sleep."
Rabbi  Seira  said,  "To  the  middle  of  the  night  he  was  sleeping  like  a
horse ;  from  that  time  and  afterwards  he  strengthened  himself  like  a
lion."  Rabbi  Ashi  said,  "To  the  middle  of  the  night  he  occupied  him-
self with  the  words  of  the  law ;  from  that  and  afterwards  with  psalms
and  hymns."  And  the  gloaming  is  that  of  the  evening.  Is  there  not
also  a  gloaming  of  the  morning?  As  it  is  written  (i  Sam.  xxx.  17) :
"  And  David  smote  them  from  the  gloaming  even  to  the  evening  of
the  next  day."  Is  it  not  so,  from  that  of  the  morning  to  that  of  the
evening  ?  No,  from  the  evening  again  to  the  evening.  If  this  were
so,  it  would  have  been  written,  "  From  the  gloaming  to  the  gloaming,"

1  All  this  is  intended  to  establish  Rabbi  Nathan's  view,  that  there  are  only
three  watches  in  the  night.


3 14  Appendix  II.

or  else,  "  From  the  evening  to  the  evening."  Also  Raba  said  :
"  There  are  two  gloamings,  the  gloaming  of  the  night,  and  then  comes
the  morning,  and  the  gloaming  of  the  day,  and  then  comes  the  night."
And  David,  How  did  he  know  the  middle  of  the  night  when  it  was,
since  Moses  our  teacher  did  not  know  it  ?  For  it  is  written  (Exod.
xi.  4),  "  About  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  the  midst  of  Egypt."
What  is  it  "about  midnight?"  If  it  should  be  said  that  the  Holy
One,  blessed  be  His  Name,  said  to  him  "  about  the  middle" — can
there  be  any  doubting  in  heaven  ?  But  he  said  to  him  "  at  mid-
night." Then  came  he  and  said  "about  midnight"  (that  is,  Moses  said
so,  because  he  did  not  know  exactly  when  midnight  was).  Accordingly
he  was  in  doubt ;  and  David,  should  he  have  known  ?  David  had  a
sign,  for  Rabbi  Acha,  the  son  of  Bisna,  said  that  Rabbi  Simeon,  the
pious,  said  :  "  A  harp  was  hung  up  above  the  bed  of  David,  and
when  the  middle  of  the  night  came,  the  north  wind  arose  and  blew
over  it,  and  it  sounded  of  itself.  Immediately  he  rose  up  and
studied  in  the  Thorah  till  the  morning  column  arose.  As  soon  as  the
morning  column  arose,  the  sages  of  Israel  went  to  him.  They  said
to  him  :  '  Our  Lord,  O  King  !  thy  people  Israel  require  to  be  sup-
ported.' He  said  to  them,  '  Support  yourselves  one  of  the  other.'
They  said  to  him,  '  A  handful  does  not  satisfy  a  lion,  and  a  pit  is  not
filled  with  its  own  sand.'  He  said  to  them,  '  Go  and  spread  your
hands  in  the  army  (make  wars  of  conquest).'  Immediately  they
took  counsel  with  Ahithophel  and  thought  over  it  in  the  Sanhedrim,
and  inquired  at  the  Urim  and  Thummim."  Rabbi  Joseph  said  :
"What  else  should  this  Scripture  be  (i  Chron.  xxvii.  34):  'And
after  Ahithophel  was  Benajahu,  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (the  reading  is
here  different  from  that  of  our  text),  and  Abiathar;  and  the  general  of
the  king's  army  was  Joab.'  Ahithophel,  he  was  the  counsellor,  and  so  it
is  said  (2  Sam.  xvi.  23),  'And  the  counsel  ot  Ahithophel,  which  he  coun-
selled in  those  days,  was  as  if  a  man  had  inquired  at  the  oracle  ot  God.'
Benajahu,  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  that  is  the  Sanhedrim,1  and  Abiathar ;
these  are  the  Urim  and  Thummim.  And  so  it  is  said  (2  Sam.  xx.  23),
1  Whose  chief  he  is  supposed  to  have  been.


Specimens  from  the   Talmud.  3 1 5

'And  Benaiah,  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  was  over  the  Cherethites,
and  over  the  Pelethites.'  And  why  was  their  name  called  Chereth-
ites and  Pelethites  ?  Cherethites,  because  they  cut  short  their  words,
and  Pelethites,  because  they  were  wonderful  in  their  words.1  And
after  these  was  Joab,  the  general  of  the  king."  Rabbi  Isaac,  the  son
of  Idi,  said,  "  Some  say,  what  else2  means  the  Scripture  (Ps.  Ivii.  8),

*  Awake  up,  my  glory ;  awake,  psaltery  and  harp  ;  I  myself  will  wake
the  morning  ?  '  "     Rabbi  Seria  said,  "  Moses  knew  it  (the  midnight
hour),  and  so  also  did  David  know  it.     But  if  David  knew  it,  for
what  was  the  harp  ?    To  awaken  him  from  sleep.     And  if  Moses
knew  it,  why  did  he  require   to  say,   '  about    midnight  ? '      Moses
thought,  perhaps,  the  astronomers  of  Pharaoh  may  err,  and  then  say,

*  Moses  is  a  liar.'     For  the  Master  says,  '  Teach  thy  tongue  to  say,  I
do  not  know ;  perhaps  thou  mayest  be  regarded  as  inventing,  and
be  seized.'"     Rabbi  Ashi  said,  "  It  was  in  the  middle  of  the  night  of
the  thirteenth,  after  which  the  fourteenth  dawns ; "  and  so  Moses  said
to  Israel,  "The  Holy  One,  blessed  be  His  Name,  says,  '  To-morrow,
about  midnight,  as  now,  I  shall  go  out  in  the  midst  of  Egypt.' "

Fol.  1 6  b.  Rabbi  Elazar  said:  "What  is  it  that  is  written
(Ps.  Ixiii.  4),  '  Thus  will  I  bless  Thee  while  I  live ;  I  will  lift  up
my  hands  in  Thy  Name  ? '  *  I  will  bless  Thee  while  I  live  : '  that
is  saying  the  'Shema.'  '  I  will  lift  my  hands  in  Thy  Name:'  that  is
prayer; — and  if  he  does  so,  of  him  does  the  Scripture  say,  'My
soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness.'  And  not  only
this,  but  he  inherits  two  worlds — this  world  and  the  world  to  come,
as  it  is  written,  '  And  my  mouth  shall  praise  Thee  with  lips  of  joys.'  "3

Rabbi  Elazar,  after  he  had  finished  his  prayer,  said  thus :  "  May  it
please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  that  Thou  wouldest  cause  to  dwell
in  our  lot  love  and  brotherhood,  peace  and  friendship,  and  increase
our  possession  with  disciples,  and  gladden  our  end  with  a  happy  end,

1  There  is  here  a  play  on  the  words.

2  Referring  again  to  the  saying  of  Rabbi  Simeon,  the  pious,  mentioned  on  the
previous  page.

3  The  plural  indicating  the  two  worlds.


316  Appendix  II.

and  with  hope,  and  place  our  portion  in  Paradise.  Order  us  in  good
fellowship,  and  with  the  inclination  for  good  in  this  world,  that  we
may  rise  and  find  our  hearts  in  the  fear  of  Thy  Name,  and  that  the
desire  of  our  souls  may  come  before  Thee  for  good."1

Rabbi  Jochanan,  after  he  had  finished  his  prayer,  said  thus:  "  May
it  please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  that  Thou  mayest  look  upon  our
shame  and  see  our  sorrows,  and  that  Thou  clothe  Thyself  with
mercy,  and  that  Thou  cover  Thyself  with  Thy  might,  and  that  Thou
robe  Thyself  with  Thy  grace,  and  that  Thou  gird  Thyself  with
favour,  that  there  come  before  Thee  the  measurement  of  Thy  good-
ness and  of  Thy  condescension."

Rabbi  Seira,  after  he  had  finished  his  prayers,  said  thus  :  "  May  it
please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  that  we  may  not  sin,  and  not  be  put
to  shame,  and  not  be  confounded  before  our  fathers."

Rabbi  Chija,  after  he  had  finished  his  prayers,  said  thus  :  "  May  it
please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  that  Thy  Thorah  be  our  labour,  and
that  our  hearts  be  not  faint,  and  that  our  eyes  be  not  darkened."

Rab,  after  he  had  finished  his  prayers,  said  thus  :  "  May  it  please
Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  to  give  us  prolonged  life,  a  life  of  peace,  a
life  of  good,  a  life  of  blessing,  a  life  of  nourishment,  a  life  of  vigorous
strength,  a  life  in  which  there  shall  be  the  fear  of  sin,  a  life  in  which
there  shall  be  neither  shame  nor  confusion,  a  life  of  riches  and
honour,  a  life  in  which  there  shall  be  among  us  love  of  the  Thorah
and  the  fear  of  heaven,  a  life  in  which  Thou  fulfil  in  us  all  the  desires
of  our  hearts  for  good."

Rabbi,  after  he  had  finished  his  prayers,  said  thus  :  "  May  it  please
Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  and  the  God  of  our  fathers,  to  preserve  us
from  the  daring  sinner  and  from  daring  sin,  from  an  evil  man  and
an  evil  accident,  from  the  evil  impulse,  from  an  evil  companion,  from
an  evil  neighbour,  from  Satan  the  destroyer,  from  a  severe  judgment,
and  from  a  severe  opponent,  whether  he  be  a  son  of  the  covenant
or  not."  And  this,  although  the  officers  stood  around  Rabbi.2

1  This  and  the  following  are  prayers  at  night.

1  He  was  not  deterred  by  their  presence  from  so  praying.


Specimens  from  the   Talmud.  3 1 7

Rabbi  Saphra,  after  he  had  finished  his  prayers,  said  thus  :  "  May
it  please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  that  Thou  wilt  put  peace  among
the  family  above  (the  angels)  and  in  the  family  below,  and  between
the  students  who  busy  themselves  with  Thy  Thorah,  whether  they
busy  themselves  with  it  for  its  own  sake  or  not  for  its  own  sake  \  and
with  reference  to  all  who  busy  themselves  with  it  not  for  its  own
sake,  may  it  please  Thee,  that  they  may  busy  themselves  with  it  for
its  own  sake."

Rabbi  Alexander,  after  he  had  finished  his  prayer,  said  thus:
"  May  it  please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  to  place  us  in  a  corner  of
light,  and  not  in  a  corner  of  darkness,  and  let  not  our  heart  become
faint,  nor  our  eyes  become  darkened."  But  some  say,  it  was  Rab
who  prayed  this  prayer,  and  that  Rabbi  Alexander,  after  he  had
prayed,  said  thus :  "  Lord  of  the  worlds,  it  is  manifest  and  known
before  Thee  that  our  pleasure  is  to  do  Thy  pleasure,  and  who  hinders
it  ?  The  leaven  in  the  bake-meat  and  the  service  of  foreign  domina-
tion. May  it  please  Thee  to  deliver  us  from  their  hands,  that  we
may  return  to  do  the  laws  of  Thy  good  pleasure  with  a  perfect  heart."
Raba,  when  he  had  finished  his  prayer,  said  thus  :  "  Lord,  until  I
was  created  I  was  nothing,  and  now  that  I  am  created,  I  am  as  if  I
were  not  created.  Dust  I  am  in  life,  and  how  much  more  when  I
am  dead  ?  Behold  I  am  before  Thee  like  a  vessel  filled  with  shame
and  confusion.  May  it  please  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  that  I  may
no  more  sin,  and  what  I  have  sinned  before  Thee,  blot  out  in  Thy
great  mercy,  but  not  through  chastisements  and  evil  diseases."  And
the  same  was  the  confession  of  Rab  Hamnuna  the  Less  on  the  Day
of  Atonement.

Mar,  the  son  of  Rabina,  when  he  had  ended  his  prayer,  said
as  follows :  "  Lord,  keep  our  tongue  from  evil,  and  our  lips  from
speaking  guile.  And  towards  those  who  curse  my  soul,  let  me  be
silent,  and  let  my  soul  be  like  the  dust  towards  all.  Open  my  heart
in  Thy  law,  and  let  my  soul  follow  after  Thy  commandments,  and
deliver  me  from  an  evil  accident,  from  the  evil  disposition,  and  from
an  evil  woman,  and  from  all  evil  which  lifts  itself  up  to  come  into  the


318  Appendix  II.

world.  And  all  who  think  evil  against  me,  speedily  destroy  theii
counsel,  and  render  vain  their  thoughts.  May  it  please  Thee,  that
the  words  of  my  mouth  and  the  meditation  of  my  heart  be  acceptable
before  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength  and  my  Redeemer."

Rabbi  Sheisheth,  when  he  had  fasted,  said,  after  he  had  finished  his
prayer  :  "  Lord  of  the  world,  it  is  evident  before  Thee,  that  at  the
time  that  the  Sanctuary  stood,  a  man  sinned,  and  he  brought  an
offering,  nor  did  they  offer  of  it  anything  but  its  fat  and  its  blood,  and
he  was  forgiven.  And  now  I  have  remained  in  fasting,  and  my  fat
and  my  blood  have  been  diminished,  may  it  please  Thee,  that  my
fat  and  my  blood  which  have  been  diminished  be  as  if  I  had  offered
them  upon  the  altar,  and  be  merciful  to  me."

Rabbi  Jochanan,  when  he  had  finished  the  book  of  Job,  said  thus  :
"  The  end  of  a  man  is  to  die,  and  the  end  of  an  animal  is  to  be
slaughtered,  and  all  are  appointed  to  death.  Blessed  is  he  who  has
grown  up  in  the  Thorah,  and  busied  himself  with  the  Thorah,  and
labours  to  have  a  quiet  spirit  towards  his  Creator,  and  who  has
grown  big  with  a  good  name,  and  who  has  departed  from  this  world
with  a  good  name.  And  of  him,  says  Solomon  (Eccles.  vii.  i .) :  'A
good  name  is  better  than  precious  ointment ;  and  the  day  of  death
than  the  day  of  one's  birth/  "

It  was  customary  in  the  mouth  of  Rabbi  Meir :  "  Learn  with  all
thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  soul,  in  order  to  know  My  ways,  and  to
grow  up  by  the  gates  of  My  Thorah.  Keep  My  Thorah  in  thy
heart,  and  let  My  fear  be  before  thine  eyes.  Keep  thy  mouth  from
all  sin,  and  cleanse  and  sanctify  thyself  from  all  transgression  and
sin,  and  I  shall  be  with  thee  in  every  place."

Fol.  55  a.  Rabbi  Chisda  said  :  "Every  dream  is  without  a  mean-
ing, but  not  if  one  has  fasted  (on  account  of  it)."  Also  Rabbi  Chisda
said  :  "  A  dream  which  is  not  interpreted  is  like  a  letter  which  is  not
read."  Also  Rabbi  Chisda  said  :  "Neither  is  there  a  good  dream  in
which  everything  comes  to  pass,  nor  yet  a  bad  dream  in  which
everything  comes  to  pass."  Also  Rabbi  Chisda  said  :  "  An  evil
dream  is  better  than  a  good  dream."  Also  Rabbi  Chisda  said  :


Specimens  from  the  Talmud.  319

"  An  evil  dream,  its  sorrow  is  sufficient ;  a  good  dream,  its  pleasure
is  sufficient."  Rabbi  Joseph  said :  "  A  good  dream  even  the  joy
with  me  annuls  it." 1  Rabbi  Chisda  also  said  :  "  An  evil  dream  is
heavier  than  a  chastisement,  for  it  is  written  (Eccles.  iii.  14),  *  And
God  doeth  it,  that  men  should  fear  before  Him.' "  And  Rabbah,  the
grandson  of  Chanah,  said,  Rabbi  Jochanan  said  :  "  This  refers  to  an
evil  dream.  (Jer.  xxiii.  28),  'The  prophet  that  hath  a  dream,  let
him  tell  a  dream ;  and  he  that  hath  My  Word,  let  him  speak  My
Word  faithfully.  What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat?  saith  the  Lord/
But  what  have  the  wheat  and  the  chaff  to  do  with  a  dream?"  But,
says  Rabbi  Jochanan,  in  name  of  Rabbi  Simeon,  the  son  of
Joche,  "  As  wheat  alone  is  not  possible  without  straw,  so  also  is  a
dream  not  possible  without  false  things."  Rabbi  Berachiah  said :
"  A  dream,  even  if  a  part  of  it  is  fulfilled,  the  whole  of  it  is  not
fulfilled.  "Whence  have  we  this?  From  Joseph,  for  it  is  written
(Gen.  xxxvii.  9),  '  And  behold  the  sun  and  the  moon,'  etc.  And  at
that  time  his  mother  was  no  more."  Rabbi  Levi  said  :  "  Let  a  man
always  look  forward  in  regard  to  a  good  dream,  even  as  long  as
twenty-two  years.  Whence  have  we  that  ?  From  Joseph,  for  it  is
written  (Gen.  xxxvii.  2),  '  These  are  the  generations  of  Jacob.  Joseph
was  seventeen  years  old,'  and  so  en.  And  it  is  written  (Gen.  xli.  46),
1  And  Joseph  was  thirty  years  old  when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh,'  and
so  on.  From  seventeen  to  thirty,  how  much  is  it  ?  Thirteen.  And
seven  of  plenty,  and  two  of  famine,  that  makes  twenty-two."

Rabbi  Huna  said  :  "  To  a  good  man  a  good  dream  is  not  shown,
and  to  an  evil  man  an  evil  dream  is  not  shown.  We  have  this
doctrine  :  All  the  years  of  David  he  did  not  see  a  good  dream,  and  all
the  years  of  Ahithophel  he  did  not  see  an  evil  dream.  But  yet  it  is
written  (Ps.  xci.  10),  'There  shall  no  evil  befall  thee.'  "

Rabbi  Huna,  the  son  of  Ami,  said,  Rabbi  Pedath  said,  Rabbi  Jo-
chanan said  :  "  He  that  seeth  a  dream,  and  his  soul  is  distressed,  let
him  go  and  interpret  it  before  three."  Let  him  interpret  it?  But
Rabbi  Chisda  said :  "  A  dream  which  is  not  interpreted  is  like  a

-  This  Rabbi  was  blind.


3-'o  Appendix  77.

letter  which  is  not  read."  But  certainly  (I  mean),  that  he  give  a
good  interpretation  before  three.  He  summons  three,  and  he  says
to  them,  "  I  have  had  a  good  dream."  And  they  say  to  him,
"  Behold,  it  is  good,  and  it  will  be  good.  The  Merciful  One  turn
it  to  good.  Seven  times  let  it  be  decreed  upon  thee  from  heaven
that  it  be  good,  and  it  will  be  good."  Then  they  say  three
turnings,  and  three  deliverances,  and  three  times  "Peace."  Three
turnings  (Ps.  xxx.  n),  "Thou  hast  turned  for  me  my  mourning
into  dancing :  Thou  hast  put  off  my  sackcloth,  and  girded  me
with  gladness."  Again  (Jer.  xxxi.  13),  "Then  shall  the  virgin
rejoice  in  the  dance,  both  young  men  and  old  together  :  for  I  will
turn  their  mourning  into  joy,"  and  so  on.  Again  (Deut.  xxiii.  5),
"Nevertheless  the  Lord  thy  God  would  not  hearken  unto  Balaam;
but  He  turned,"  and  so  on.  "  Three  deliverances,"  as  it  is  written  (Ps.
Iv.  1 8),  "He  hath  delivered  my  soul  in  peace  from  the  battle  that
was  against  me,"  and  so  on  ;  (Isa.  xxxv.  10),  "And  the  ransomed  of  the
Lord  shall  return,"  and  so  on;  (i  Sam.  xiv.  45),  "And  the  people
said  unto  Saul,  Shall  Jonathan  die,  who  hath  wrought  this  salvation
in  Israel  ?"  "  Three  times  peace,"  as  it  is  written  (Isa.  Ivii.  19),  "  I
create  the  fruit  of  the  lips ;  Peace,  peace  to  him  that  is  far  of,
and  to  him  that  is  near,  saith  the  Lord,"  etc.;  (i  Chron.  xii.  18),
"Then  the  spirit  clothed  Amasai,"  and  so  on;  (i  Sam.  xxv.  6),
"  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  him  that  liveth,  Peace  be  both  to  thee,  and
peace  be  to  thine  house,"  and  so  on.

Ameimer,  and  Mar  Sutra,  and  Rabbi  Ashi  were  sitting  all  together.
They  said  :  "  Would  that  each  one  might  say  something  which  had  not
been  heard  by  his  companion."  Then  began  one  among  them,  and  said :
"  If  any  one  has  seen  a  dream,  and  does  not  know  what  he  has  seen,
let  him  place  himself  before  the  priests  of  his  time,  while  they  spread
their  hands  (in  blessing),  and  let  him  say  thus  : '  Lord  of  the  world,  I  am
Thine,  and  my  dreams  are  Thine.  I  have  dreamt  a  dream,  and  I
know  not  what  it  is,  whether  I  have  dreamed  for  myself,  or  whether
my  companions  have  dreamt  of  me,  or  whether  I  have  dreamt  of
others.  If  they  be  good  (dreams)  confirm  them,  and  strengthen


Specimens  from  the  Talmud.  321

ibem,  like  the  dreams  of  Joseph ;  and  if  they  need  healing,  heal
them,  as  the  waters  of  Marah  by  the  hands  of  Moses,  our  teacher,
and  as  Miriam  from  her  leprosy,  and  as  Hezekiah  from  his  sickness,
and  as  the  waters  of  Jericho  by  the  hands  of  Elisha.  And  as
Thou  hast  turned  into  blessing  the  curse  of  Balaam,  the  wicked  one,
so  turn  all  my  dreams  for  me  to  good.'  And  let  him  finish  with  the
priests,  that  the  congregation  may  say,  c  Amen.'  And  if  not,  let  him
say  thus :  '  Mighty  One  in  the  heights,  Who  dwellest  in  strength,
Thou  art  peace,  and  Thy  name  is  peace.  May  it  please  Thee  to
dispense  to  us  peace.'"  The  next  one  began,  and  said  :  "  If  any  one
enters  into  a  city,  and  is  afraid  of  the  evil  eye,  let  him  take  the
thumb  of  his  right  hand  into  his  left,  and  the  thumb  of  his  left  hand
into  his  right  hand,  and  let  him  say  thus :  'I,  such  an  one,  the  son  of
such  an  one,  descend  from  the  seed  of  Joseph,  over  whom  an  evil  eye
can  have  no  power,  as  it  is  written  (Gen.  xlix.  22),  "Joseph  is  a  fruit-
ful bough,  even  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  well,"  and  so  on.' "  Read  not :
"by  a  well"  but  "transcending  the  eye."1  Rabbi  Jose,  the  son  of
Rabbi  Chaninah,  said:  "From  this  (Gen.  xlviii.  16),  'And  let  them
grow '  (like  fishes).2  As  fishes,  which  inhabit  the  waters,  are  covered
by  them,  and  no  evil  eye  has  power  over  them,  so  also  the  seed  of
Joseph,  no  evil  eye  has  power  over  it.  But  if  he  is  afraid  of  his
own  evil  eye,  let  him  look  on  his  left  nostril."  And  the  third  com-
menced and  said :  "If  any  one  is  sick,  let  him  not  make  it  known  the
first  day,  lest  he  make  his  fate  worse.  But  after  that  and  onwards
let  him  make  it  known.  So  it  was  with  Raba  when  he  was  ill,  the
first  day  he  did  not  make  it  known.  From  that  and  onwards  he
said  to  his  servant :  '  Go  outside,  and  cry,  Raba  is  sick ;  he  that
pitieth  me,  let  him  ask  for  me  pity,  and  he  that  hateth  me,  let  him
rejoice  over  me.'"  And  it  is  written  (Prov.  xxiv.  17,  18),  "Rejoice
not  when  thine  enemy  falleth,  and  let  not  thine  heart  be  glad  when
he  stumbleth  :  lest  the  Lord  see  it,  and  it  displease  Him,  and  He
turn  away  His  wrath  from  him."

1  There  is  a  play  here  upon  the  words.
a  Another  play  upon  the  words.

Y


322  Appendix  II.

Samuel,  when  he  had  seen  an  evil  dream,  said  (Zech.  x.  2) :  u  For
the  idols  have  spoken  vanity,  and  the  diviners  have  seen  a  lie,  and
the  dreams  speak  false  things."  And  when  he  saw  a  good  dream  he
said :  "  And  should  dreams  indeed  speak  falsehood  seeing  it  is
written  (Num.  xii.  6 ),  '  I  will  speak  in  a  dream  to  him  ? ' '  Raba
asked  :  "It  is  written,  ' In  a  dream  I  will  speak  to  him ; '  and  it  is
written,  'And  dreams  speak  falsehood.' "  That  is  no  question — for
the  one  is  by  an  angel  and  the  other  by  an  evil  spirit.

Rabbi  Bisna,  the  son  of  Sabda,  said,  Rabbi  Akiba  said,  Rabbi
Panda  said,  Rabbi  Nahum  said,  Rabbi  Birim  said  in  the  name  of  an
aged  man — and  who  is  he  ?  Rabbi  Banah  :  "  There  were  four-and-
twenty  interpreters  of  dreams  in  Jerusalem.  Once  I  dreamed  a
dream,  and  I  went  before  them  all,  and  what  the  one  interpreted
to  me  the  other  did  not  interpret  to  me,  and  yet  all  were  fulfilled  to
me,  in  order  to  fulfil  what  is  written,  *  All  dreams  go  after  the  mouth.'
But  is  this  Scripture,  '  All  dreams  go  after  the  mouth  ? ' "  Yes,  and
According  to  Rabbi  Elasar.  For  Rabbi  Elasar  said,  "Whence  this,  that
all  dreams  go  after  the  mouth?"  Because  it  is  said  (Gen.  xli.  13),
"  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  interpreted  to  us,  so  it  was."  Raba
said  :  "  But  this  only,  if  he  interpret  to  be  according  to  the  contents
of  the  dream,  as  it  is  written  (Gen.  xli.  12),  *  To  each  man  according
to  his  dream  he  did  interpret;'  (Gen.  xl.  16),  'And  the  chief  baker
saw  that  the  interpretation  was  good.'"  Whence  did  he  know  it?
Rabbi  Elasar  said  :  "  This  teaches,  that  each  one  of  them  saw  the
dream  and  the  interpretation  of  the  dream  of  his  companion."

Rabbi  Jochanan  said  :  "  If  one  rises,  and  a  verse  comes  into  his
mouth,  behold  this  is  like  a  little  prophecy."  And  Rabbi  Jochanan
said  :  "Three  dreams  are  fulfilled— a  morning  dream,  a  dream  which
one's  companion  has  dreamed,  and  a  dream  which  is  interpreted  in
the  middle  of  the  dream"  (or  by  a  dream).  And  some  say  also,  a  dream
which  is  repeated,  as  it  is  said  (Gen.  xli.  32),  "And  for  that  the  dream
was  doubled,"  and  so  on.  Rabbi  Samuel,  the  son  of  Nachmeni,  said,
Rabbi  Jonathan  said  :  "  Nothing  else  is  shown  to  a  man  but  what  is
in  the  thoughts  of  his  heart"  For  it  is  said  (Dan.  ii.  29),  "As  for


Specimens  from  the   Talmud.  323

thee,  O  king,  thy  thoughts  came  into  thy  mind  upon  thy  bed."  And
if  thou  wilt,  I  shall  say  :  from  this  (Dan.  ii.  30),  "  That  thou  mightest
know  the  thoughts  of  thy  heart."  Raba  said  :  "  Thou  canst  know  it,
for  there  is  not  shown  to  a  man  either  a  golden  palm  tree,  nor  an
elephant  going  through  the  eye  of  a  needle."

Folio  56  a.

The  son  of  Hedja  was  an  interpreter  of  dreams.     If  any  one  gave
him  a  reward,  he  interpreted  his  dreams  for  good ;  if  any  one  did
not  give  him  a  reward,  he  interpreted  for  evil.     Abaje  and  Raba  saw
a  dream.   Abaje  gave  him  a  susa,  and  Raba  gave  him  nothing.    They
said  to  him  :  "  We  read  in  the  dreams  (Deut.  xxviii.  31),  '  Thine  ox
shall  be  slain  before  thine  eyes,'  etc."      To  Raba  he  said  :  "  Thy
business  will  be  ruined,  and  thou  shalt  have  no  desire  to  eat  from
sorrow  of  thy  heart."     To  Abaje  he  said  :  "  Thy  business  will  be
extended,  and  thou  shalt  have  no  desire  to  eat  from  the  joy  of  thy
heart."     They  said  to  him :  "We  read  (ver.  41),  'Thou  shalt  beget
sons  and  daughters,'  and  so  on."     To  Raba  he  said :  "  They  will
be  taken  captive."    To  Abaje  he  said  :  "  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters
shall  be  many,  and  hence  thy  daughters  shall  be  married  outside  the
land,  so  that  they  will  seem  to  thee  as  if  they  had  been  led  captive."
"  We  read  (ver.  32) :  *  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  shall  be  given  unto
another  people.' "     To  Abaje  he  said  :  "  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters
shall   be   many.      Thou  shalt  say,  to  thy  relatives  (thou  wilt  wed
them),  but  she  (thy  wife)  shall  say :  to  her  relatives,  and  she  will
induce  thee,  that  thou  wilt  give  them  to  her  relatives ;  which  are  like
another  nation."     To  Raba  he  said :  "  Thy  wife  shall  die,  and  her
sons  and  her  daughters  shall  come  under  the  hands  of  another  wife."
For  Raba  said,  Rabbi  Jeremiah,  the  son  of  Aba,  said,  Rav  said  :
"  What  is  it  that  is  written  :  *  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  shall  I  give
to  another  nation.'     That  is,  the  wife  of  the  father  (step-mother)."
"  Wereadin  the  dreams  (Eccles.  ix.  7.) :  *  Go,  eat  thy  bread  with  joy.' "
To  Abaje  he  said :  "  Thy  business  shall  be  extended,  and  thou  shalt
eat  and  drink,  and  read  the  verse  in  the  joy  of  thy  heart."     To
Raba  he  said :  "  Thy  business  shall  be  ruined,  thou  shalt  kill,  but


324  Appendix  IL

shalt  not  eat  nor  drink,  and  shalt  read  for  the  sake  of  comforting
thyself."  ....  ....

In  the  end  Raba  went  alone  to  him.  He  said  to  him :  "  I  have
seen  that  the  inner  house-door  has  fallen."  He  said  to  him  :  "  Thy
wife  shall  die."  He  said  to  him :  "  I  saw  that  my  molar  teeth  and  my
teetfi  fell  out."  He  said  to  him  :  "  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  shall
dif ."  He  said  to  him  :  "  I  saw  that  two  doves  flew  away."  He  said
to  him :  "  Two  wives  shalt  thou  divorce."  He  said  to  him  :  "  I  saw
two  heads  of  cabbage."  He  said  to  him :  "  Two  boxes  on  the  ears
shalt  thou  swallow."  Raba  went  on  that  day  and  sat  in  the  academy
all  the  day.  Then  he  found  two  blind  men  who  quarrelled  with  one
another.  Then  Raba  went  to  separate  them,  and  they  struck  Raba
twice  ;  they  lifted  up  to  strike  another  time,  and  he  said,  "  Hold,  I
have  seen  only  two."

In  the  end  Raba  came  and  gave  him  a  reward.  He  said  to  him  :
''  I  saw  that  the  wall  fell."  He  said  to  him  :  "  Property  without  limits
shalt  thou  obtain."  He  said  to  him  :  "  I  saw  the  Palace  of  Abaje  that
it  fell,  and  its  dust  covered  me."  He  said  to  him :  "Abaje  shall  die,  and
his  chair  shall  come  to  thee."  He  said  to  him  :  "I  saw  my  own  palace
that  it  fell,  and  then  the  whole  world  came  and  took  brick  by  brick."
He  said  to  him  :  "Thy  teaching  shall  spread  through  the  world."  He
said  to  him  :  "I  saw  that  my  head  was  split  and  my  brain  came  out"
He  said  to  him  :  "  The  wool  of  thy  pillow  shall  come  out."  He  said  to
him  :  "  I  read  the  Egyptian  Hallel  in  the  dream."  He  said  to  him  :
*  Miracles  shall  be  done  for  thee."  He  went  with  him  upon  a  ship.
He  said :  "  To  a  man  for  whom  miracles  shall  be  done,  what  is  the  use
of  this  ?  "  As  he  ascended,  a  book  fell  from  him.  Raba  found  it,  and
saw  that  there  was  written  in  it :  "  All  dreams  go  after  the  mouth."
He  said  to  him  :  "  Wicked  One,  upon  thee  it  depended,  and  thou  hast
much  afflicted  me.  Everything  I  forgive  thee,  except  about  the
daughter  of  Rabbi  Chisda  (who  was  his  wife).  May  it  be  the  will
(of  God),  that  this  man  be  given  over  into  the  hands  of  the  govern-
ment, who  have  no  pity  upon  him."  He  said  :  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  for
it  is  ordered,  that  the  curse  of  a  sage,  even  if  it  come  causeless,  shall


Specimens  from  the  Talmud.  325

happen.  How  much  more  is  this  the  case  with  Raba,  who  has  judged  me
with  justice."  He  said  :  "  I  will  go  and  emigrate,  for  the  master  said,
*  Banishment  expiates  sin.'"  He  arose  and  emigrated  to  the  Romans.
He  went  and  sat  down  at  the  door  of  the  head  treasurer  of  the  king.
The  head  treasurer  saw  a  dream.  He  said  to  him :  "I  saw  a  dream,
that  a  needle  went  into  my  finger."  He  said  to  him  :  "  Give  me  a
susa;"  but  lie  gave  him  nothing,  and  hence  he  said  nothing  at  all  to
him.  He  said  to  him  :  "  I  saw  that  a  worm  fell  upon  two  of  my  fin-
gers." He  said  to  him  :  "Give  me  a  susa;"  but  he  gave  him  nothing,
and  he  did  not  say  anything  at  all  to  him.  He  said  to  him  :  "  I  saw
that  a  worm  fell  upon  my  whole  hand."  He  said  to  him  :  "  A  worm
has  come  into  all  the  garments  "  (of  the  king).  They  heard  this  in
the  house  of  the  king,  and  they  brought  the  head  treasurer  in  order
that  they  might  kill  him.  He  said  to  him  :  "  Why  I  ?  let  him  be
brought  who  knew  it  and  did  not  say."  They  brought  the  son  of
Hedja.  He  said  to  him  :  "  On  account  of  thy  susa  have  been  spoiled
the  garments  of  the  king."  They  bound  two  cedars  with  rope,  and
tied  one  foot  to  one  cedar,  and  the  other  foot  to  the  other  cedar,
and  let  go  the  ropes,  so  that  his  head  was  split ;  for  each  cedar  went
back  and  stood  in  its  place,  and  he  was  split  and  fell  in  two.

[And  so  the  interpretation  of  dreams  goes  on  for  other  two  and  a
half  folio  pages.  These  three  specimen  extracts  may  suffice  to  give
examples  of  the  indifferent,  the  good,  and  the  absurd,  which  consti-
tute the  Talmud.  They  will  show  the  necessity  of  discrimination,
and  how  readily  the  Talmud,  as  a  whole,  may  be  either  decried  by
enemies  or  unduly  exalted  hy  a  judicious  selection  of  passages.]


ANALYSIS    OF    CONTENTS.


CHAP.  I.— PALESTINE  EIGHTEEN  CENTURIES  AGO.

Palestine — Its  present  condition — Its  condition  at  the  time  of  Christ — Senti-
ments of  Rabbis  Jonathan  and  Meir  concerning  it — Climate — Vegetable
and  animal  productions — Scenery — Religious  enthusiasm  about  Palestine
— Love  of  the  Rabbis  for  the  land — Treatment  of  Babylonian  schools
by  the  Rabbis — Superstitions  concerning  Palestine — Present  state  of
feeling  regarding  it — How  swept  of  relics  —Extent  of  Palestine  at  the
time  of  Christ — Inhabitants — Opinions  concerning  the  ten  tribes —
Government — Testament  of  Herod  the  Great — Disputes  between  Arche-
laus  and  Herod  Antipas — Income  of  Archelaus,  of  Herod  the  Great,  and
of  Agrippa  II. — Coins  of  Palestine — Division  of  Palestine — Views  of  the
Jews  concerning  Samaria Poge

CHAP.  II.—  JEWS  AND  GENTILES  IN  "THE  LAND."

Boundaries  of  Palestine— Views  of  the  Rabbis  on  the  sanctity  of  the  land  and
the  uncleanness  of  heathen  soil — The  three  lands  designated  as  Palestine
— Offerings,  from  whence  lawful — Countries  included  in  Syria — Its
assimilation  to,  and  distinction  from  Palestine — Jewish  views  of  heathen
countries — Arrangement  by  Maimonides  of  all  countries — Places
allowed  by  the  Rabbis  to  bring  Biccurim  and  Therumoth — Distinc-
tions between  the  country  east  and  west  of  the  Jordan — Pre-eminence
of  Judaea  proper  over  Galilee — Antioch — The  borders  of  Tyre  and
Sidon — Miracles  worked  there— Parties  in  Palestine  at  the  time  of  Christ
— Dialects — Spread  of  Grecianism — Divisions  of  Judaism — Separation
between  Pharisaical  Jews  and  heathens — Views  of  Jews  and  heathens
respecting  each  other Pag'


Analysis  of  Contents.  327

CHAP.  III. — IN  GALILEE  AT  THE  TIME  OF  OUR  LORD.

Distinction  between  Galilee  and  Judaea — Issue  of  the  Mishnah  and  of  the
Jerusalem  Talmud  from  Tiberias — Sentiments  of  the  Pharisees  concern-
ing Galilee — Prayer  of  a  celebrated  Rabbi — Rabbi  Jannai — Peculiarities
of  Galilee — Territory — Distinction  between  Upper  and  Lower  Galilee —
Safed— Scenery  of  Upper  Galilee — The  great  caravan  road — Fruitfulness
of  Galilee — Towns,  villages,  and  population  of  Galilee — Its  industries —
Nazareth — Celebrated  cities  of  Galilee — Rabbinical  views  and  sayings
concerning  it — Theological  distinctions  between  Galilee  and  Judaea —
Character  of  the  Galileans — The  Lake  of  Galilee  .  .  .  Page  30

CHAP.  IV. — TRAVELLING  IN  PALESTINE  — ROADS,  INNS,  HOSPITALITY,
CUSTOM-HOUSE  OFFICERS,  TAXATION,  PUBLICANS.

Travelling  in  Palestine — Great  highways — Secondary  roads — Different  terms
for  them — Roman  roads — Repair  of  highways — Vehicles — Caravans —
Hospitality — Rabbinical  sayings  concerning  it — Rules  for  hosts  and
guests — Inns — Secret  police — Tax  collectors — Tolls  and  taxes — Royal
revenues — Roman  taxation— Religious  scruples  concerning  it — Publicans

—  Calling  of  Levi .         Page    42

CHAP.  V.— IN  JUD^A.

Judaea,  how  distinguished  above  Galilee — Scenery — Places  passed  by  pilgrims

—  Shiloh  —  Bethel  —  Ramah— Rachel's   pillar  —  The   Shephelah  —The
wilderness  of  Judaea — Masada — Jericho — The  Arabah — Jewish  feelings
concerning  Judaea — Expectations  of  the  Messiah — False  Messiahs — Senti-
ments of  the  Rabbis  on  this  subject — Subjects  engrossing  the  attention
of  the  Rabbis — Privileges  of  living  in  Judaea — Its  boundaries — Caesarea
— Divisions  of  Judaea — Plain  of  Sharon — Antipatris — Lydda — Chephar
Tabi— Joppa  or  Jaffa — Emmaus — Bethlehem,  how  regarded  in  connec-
tion with  the  birth  of  the  Messiah — Migdal  Eder — The  shepherds  pub-
lishing the  birth  of  Christ— Jerusalem — Rabbinical  sentiments  concern-
ing it— Names  given  to  the  city — Synagogues  in  Jerusal em— Hospitality
of  its  inhabitants — Bethany  and  Bethphage — Character  of  the  inhabitants
of    Jerusalem — Jewish    feelings    about  the    city — How    peopled — The
Temple  .  Page    59

CHAP.  VI. — JEWISH  HOMES.

Distinction  between  Jews  and  Gentiles— Jewish  towns  and  villages— Number  of
townships— Distinction  between  villages,  townships,  and  towns— Villages
— Appearance  of  towns — The  gate — Places  of  traffic—  Guilds— Character  of
the  Jews— Appearance  of  a  town  by  night — Windows— Jewish  feelings  on


328  Analysis  of  Contents.

representations  of  things  in  heaven  and  earth — Views  of  Rabbi  Gamaliel
—The  rule  of  towns  and  villages— Local  Sanhedrim— Police  and  sanitary
regulations— Pavement  of  towns— Structure  of  houses— Roofs — The
road  of  the  roofs  — Strangers'  rooms — Gallery  round  the  court — Upper
rooms— Inner  court— Furniture— Family  life— Religious  rites  in  the
family— Family  feasts— The  Sabbath— Position  of  woman— Relation
between  members  of  a  family — Childlessness— Relation  between  parents
and  children  —  Reverence  for  age — Traditionalism  destructive  of  the
spirit  of  reverence  for  parents P&ge  86

CHAP.  VII. — THE  UPBRINGING  OF  JEWISH  CHILDREN.

Terms  for  the  stages  of  early  childhood — Different  periods  of  life  according
to  Rabbi  Jehudah — Age  at  which  the  Bible  was  begun  to  be  read —
Education,  when  begun — Instruction  derived  by  a  child  from  family  life
and  rites — Feelings  of  a  child  in  the  Temple — Part  taken  by  children  in
the  Paschal  Supper — Carefulness  of  parental  training  as  illustrated  by  the
Book  of  Proverbs — Position  of  mothers — The  Queen  of  Massa — Agur —
Lemuel — Mothers  of  the  New  Testament— Upbringing  of  Timothy —
Religious  persecution  at  the  time  of  the  rising  of  the  Maccabees  —
Influence  of  pious  women — Childhood  of  our  Lord — Jesus  sitting  in
the  Temple  among  the  doctors  .  .  .  .  .  Page  103

CHAP.  VIII. — SUBJECTS  OF  STUDY.     HOME  EDUCATION  IN  ISRAEL  ;  FEMALE

EDUCATION.    ELEMENTARY  SCHOOLS,  SCHOOLMASTERS,  AND  SCHOOL

ARRANGEMENTS.

Influence  of  the  Bible  in  raising  the  standard  of  public  morality — Superiority
of  Jewish  family  life — Knowledge  of  the  law  of  God — Study  of  lan-
guages— Study  of  the  Thorah  or  law — Legends  concerning  the  importance
of  the  Rabbis — Influence  of  exclusive  study  of  the  law  upon  education
— Home  teaching — Manner  of  teaching  to  read — Writing — The  Scribes
— Use  of  initial  letters — Falsification  of  signatures  and  documents —
Writing  materials — Education  of  girls — Elementary  schools — School-
masters—Moral and  intellectual  training — Regulations  fqr  teachers —
Study  of  the  Mishnah  and  Bible — Schools  in  the  synagogues — Care  for
the  children  of  the  poor  and  for  orphans Page  12*

CHAP.  IX. — MOTHERS,  DAUGHTERS,  AND  WIVES  IN  ISRAEL.
Position  of  woman  in  Israel— The  holy  women  of  old — Rabbinical  ideas  on
the  creation  of  Eve — The  four  mothers — Miriam — Deborah— Manoah's
wife — Samuel's  mother — Abigail — The  wise  woman  of  Tekoah — Huldah


Analysis  of  Contents.  329

— The  Shunammite — Ruth — Esther — Social  equality  of  woman — The
ministry  ot  women — Polygamy— Views  concerning  divorce  at  the  time  of
Malachi — Brides — Four  reasons  for  marriage  — Maza  or  Moze  ? — Qualities
desirable  in  a  woman — Rabbinical  reasons  for  the  creation  of  Eve  from
Adam's  side — Marriage  a  religious  obligation — Age  at  which  a  man  ought
to  marry — Money  cares — Betrothal,  how  regarded — Writings  of  betrothal,
or  Shitre  Erusin — Marriage  contracts  or  Chethubah — Dowries — Legal
formalities  at  betrothal — The  marriage  ceremony — Marriage  days — The
week  before  the  marriage  in  Cana — That  marriage  as  illustrative  of  Jewish
practices  —Marriage  feasts — Friends  of  the  bridegroom — Children  of  the
bridechamber — Bride's  attire — Bridal  veil  and  crown — Bridal  lamps —
Bars  to  marriage — Divorce,  for  what  reasons  allowed — Obligations  incum-
bent on  husbands  and  wives — Women  of  the  New  Testament — Birthday
texts Page  139

CHAP.  X. — IN  DEATH  AND  AFTER  DEATH.

Death  of  Rabbi  Jochanan  ben  Saccai  and  of  Rabbi  Jehudah  the  Holy — Gospel
teaching  on  death — Influence  of  the  spiritual  state  of  parents  upon  their
children — Sickness,  how  regarded — Chastisements — Rabbinical  laws  and
regulations  for  health — Physicians — Medicines  used — Duration  of  life —
Premature  death— Death  without  leaving  a  son — 903  di  fferent  kinds  of
death— Death  by  the  mouth  of  Jehovah— Persons  over  whom  the  Angel  of
Death  had  no  power — Signs  as  to  time  and  manner  of  death — Visitation
of  the  sick— Burial — Funeral  of  the  young  man  at  Nain — Burial  cere-
monies— Sepulchres — The  resurrection  ot'Christ — 1'reatment  of  mourners
— Distinction  between  the  Own  and  the  Avel— Mourning — Anniversaries
of  death — Teaching  of  the  Rabbis  concerning  the  future  state — Paradise
and  hell — Sin — Rabbinical  parables  resembling  that  of  the  wedding
guests — Doctrinal  views  of  the  Rabbis  respecting  Purgatory  and
Paradise Page  161

CHAP.  XI.— JEWISH  VIEWS  ON  TRADE,  TRADESMEN,  AND  TRADES'  GUILDS.

Sayings  of  the  Mishnah  concerning  trade — Rabbi  Nehorai's  views — Influence
of  Jewish  surroundings  on  the  Gospel -history — Our  Lord  and  His  dis-
ciples—Dignity of  labour  as  set  forth  by  St.  Paul — Respect  of  the  Rabbis
for  honest  labour — Superiority  of  Jewish  views  on  this  subject—  Combi-
nation of  study  with  manual  labour — Labour,  how  regarded  in  the  Old
Testament  and  in  the  Apocrypha — Trades  of  the  Rabbis  — Their  prin-
ciples concerning  trade— The  Mishnah  on  labour — Resemblance  and
difference  between  the  teaching  of  the  Rabbis  and  that  of  Christ —


33°  Analysis  of  Contents.

Rabbinical  teaching  on  the  dignity  of  labour— Trades  forbidden  by  the
Mishnah — Weavers —Workmen  in  the  Temple — Traditions  concerning
Alexandrian  workmen — Alexandrian  guilds — Palestinian  guilds — Places
called  after  workmen — Workmen  engaged  by  Herod  the  Great  in  re-
building the  Temple— The  Veil  of  the  Most  Holy  Place— Difficulties  of
Jewish  employers  with  their  workmen — Trade- unions  .  •  Page  182

CHAP.  XII. — COMMERCE.

Change  in  the  views  of  the  Rabbis  concerning  manual  labour — Rabbinical
sayings  enjoining  submission  to  authorities — Jewish  views  on  commerce —
Israel  not  a  commercial  people — Palestine  unsuited  to  commercial  pur-
suits— Trade  in  the  time  of  Solomon  and  of  Jehoshaphat — Income  of
Solomon — Attacks  on  the  antiquity  of  the  Pentateuch  answered —
Rabbinical  views  on  commerce — Persons  declared  unfit  for  witness-
bearing — Inspectors  of  weights  and  measures — Prices — Percentage —
Dishonesty,  how  regarded — Change  of  Rabbinical  views  on  commerce
— The  Jews  of  Alexandria — Articles  of  trade — Imports  and  exports —
Laws  regulating  trade  and  commerce — Bargains — Money-changers —
Laws  against  dishonest  dealing — Price  of  com — Usury — Debtors  and
creditors — Pledges Page  199

CHAP.  XIII. — AMONG  THE  PEOPLE,  AND  WITH  THE  PHARISEES.

The  Pharisees — Prayers  of  the  Pharisees  in  the  streets — Rabbinical  teaching
on  the  efficacy  of  prayer — Degrees  of  Pharisees — The  Chasidim —
Fashionable  dress  of  the  time — Dress  of  ladies— Hair,  how  worn  and
adorned — Jewels  —  Borders  of  garments  —  Fringes  —  Phylacteries  or
tephUlin — Where  and  when  worn — Value  and  importance  of  phylacteries
in  the  eyes  of  the  Rabbis — Rabbinical  legends  concerning  phylacteries —
Charge  of  Christ  against  the  Pharisees— Superstitions  attaching  to  the
phylacteries — Patriotism  and  religion  of  the  Pharisees-^vHistory  of  the
"  fraternity  " — Their  vows  and  obligations — The  Pharisees  as  repre-
senting earnestness  and  religious  zeal — Their  influence  .  .  Page  213

CHAP.  XIV.— THE  "FRATERNITY"  OF  PHARISEES.

The  order  of  the  Pharisees — Conspiracy  against  St.  Paul  explained — Absolu-
tion from  vows — Resemblance  of  Pharisaism  to  Ultramontanism,  the
Ultramontanes,  and  the  Jesuits— The  Nivdalim  of  the  time  of  Ezra  and
Nehemiah — The  Perushim,  or  Pharisees — Application  of  the  terms
Chasidim  and  Nivdalim  to  the  Christian  life  -  Grecianising  policy  of  the


Analysis  of  Contents.  331

successors  of  Alexander  the  Great  —  Insurrection  of  the  Maccabees —
Amalgamation  of  the  Chasidim  with  the  Pharisees — Principles  of  the
Chasidim — Origin  of  the  Pharisees — Regulations  for  Therumah  and
tithes  at  the  time  of  John  Hyrcanus — Chabura  of  Pharisees — Obligations
of  the  Chaberim — Degrees  of  Pharisees  —Vows  binding  the  fraternity —
Their  system  of  externalism — Contempt  of  the  Rabbis  and  Sadducees  for
the  sect — Antagonism  between  Pharisaism  and  the  Gospel  .  Page  227

CHAP.  XV.— RELATION  OF  THE  PHARISEES  TO  THE  SADDUCEES  AND

ESSEN ES,    AND  TO  THE   GOSPEL  OF   CHRIST.

Triumph  of  the  Pharisees  over  the  Sadducees— A  Sadducean  high-priest  at
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles — Doctrinal  views  of  the  Sadducees — Origin  of
the  name — Classes  to  which  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  chiefly  belonged
— The  Essenes — Connection  between  their  views  and  the  religion  of
Zoroaster — Number  of  Essenes — Sectaries  belonging  to  the  mystical  and
ascetic  branch  of  Pharisaism — Dress  and  appearance  of  the  Essenes —
Their  religious  observances — Vows  and  regulations  imposed  on  the  sect
— Their  manner  of  spending  the  day — Difference  and  resemblance
between  Essenism  and  Christianity — Essential  contrariety  between  the
Gospel  of  Christ  and  the  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  and  Essenes  .  Page  239

CHAP.  XVI. — SYNAGOGUES  :  THEIR  ORIGIN,  STRUCTURE,  AND  OUTWARD
ARRANGEMENTS.

Rabbi  Jcchanan's  views  on  prayer — Prayer  in  the  house  and  in  the  synagogue
— The  Babylon  Talmud  on  frequenting  the  synagogue — Derivation  of  the
name  synagogue — The  Edah  and  the  Kahal — Origin  and  history  of  the
synagogue  —  Smallest  number  forming  a  congregation  —  Number  of
synagogues  in  Jerusalem — Situation  and  architecture  of  these  buildings —
The  synagogue  at  Capernaum — John  vi.  25,  etc.,  explained  by  the
device  on  the  lintel  of  this  synagogue — Oldest  synagogue  still  extant —
Manner  of  prayer  in  the  synagogue — Legend  about  Elijah — Rabbi  Seira
on  running  to  the  synagogue — The  Church  in  the  house — Money  collec-
tions in  the  synagogue — Sanctity  of  the  building — Oratories — Separation
of  the  sexes  in  the  synagogue — Arrangements  of  the  interior  of  the
synagogue — Synagogue  rolls  of  the  law — Seats  in  the  synagogue  Page  249

CHAP.  XVII. — THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  SYNAGOGUE.

The  synagogue  in  the  Temple — The  hall  of  paved  stones — Temple  worship
superseded  by  that  of  the  synagogue— Opportunities  afforded  by  the


33 2  Analysis  of  Contents.

synagogue  for  the  furtherance  of  the  Gospel — Synagogue  liturgy — The
Shema — The  benedictions — The  prayer  after  the  Shema — Evening
prayer — The  eighteen  eulogies — Leaders  of  the  devotions  in  the  syna-
gogue— Benediction  of  the  priests — Attitude,  dress,  and  appearance  in
prayer — The  lectionary — Number  and  time  of  the  services — Sermons —
Christ  in  the  synagogue Page  265

CHAP.  XVIII.— BRIEF  OUTLINE  OF  ANCIENT  JEWISH  THEOLOGICAL
LITERATURE.

Appointments  of  the  Synagogue — The  Sanhedrim — Ordination  of  Sanhedrists
— Qualifications — The  Chassanim  or  ministers  of  the  synagogue — The
Sheliach  Zibbur — The  Gabaei Zedakuh — The  Meturgeman — The  Targumini
—The  Midrashim—lhe,  Book  of  Jubilees,  or  Lesser  Genesis— The
pseudo-epigraphic  writings — Their  arrangements— The  Halachah — The
Haggadah— The  four  canons  and  thirty-two  rules  connecting  the  Haggadah
with  Scripture — Numerical  value  of  words — The  Mishnak — The  Gemara
— The  Jerusalem  and  the  Babylon  Talmud — Arrangement  ol  the  Mish-
nah — The  Kabbalah — Relation  between  Christ  and  the  men  of  His
period  .  .  .  . Page  281

APPENDIX  I. — Translation  of  the  Mishnic  Tractate  Middoth   .        .        Page  297

APPENDIX  II. — Translation  of  Selections  from  the  Babylon  Talmud,  Trac-
tate ittractoih.  «  «  ^  «.>...•  F<u*e  307


INDEX.


Acco,  or  Ptolemais,  212.

ADULTERATION,  210,  211.

AGUR,  114.

ALEXANDER  THE  GREAT,  Grecianising

policy  of,  232.
ALEXANDRIA,  Jews  of,  207,  208,  209  ;

privileges  granted  to,  by  Alexander

the  Great,  208 ;  workmen  of,  195.
ALMAH,  104.
AMORA,  279.

ANATHEMA,  explanation  of,  174.
ANTIOCH,  as  boundary  of  Palestine,

19  ;  events  happening  there,  19.
ANTIPATRIS,  74,  75.
ARABAH,  62.

ARAMEAN  language,  118,  119.
ARCHELAUS,     disputes    with     Herod

Antipas,     10,      1 1 ;     decision    of

Augustus  concerning,  II.
ARCHISYNAGOGOS,  or  Rosh-ha-Chene-

seth,  282.
ARON,  otherwise  called  Ark,   Tevah,

Tevutha,  or  Hechal,  262.

ASCALON,  202.

ASSIIM,  246.

BABYLONIAN  schools,  how  regarded  by
the  Rabbis,  5.

BALAAM,  Rabbinical  statement  con-
cerning, 259.

BANAIM,  245.


BAR  ABB  AS,  insurrection  ot,  267.

BAR  COCHAB,  66 ;  rising  of,  68.

BARGAINS,  210.  .

BAR  MIZVAH,  120.

BENEDICTIONS,  in  the  synagogue  before
the  Shema,  269 ;  pronounced  by
the  priests,  275,  276.

BEN-HA-CHENESETH.     See  Chaberim.

BETHANY,  83.

BETHEL,  60.

BETHLEHEM,  61,  79,  80;  prophecies
concerning,  79  ;  its  smallness,  80.

BETHPHAGE,  83.

BETROTHAL,  interval  bet  ween  marriage,
151  ;  how  made  valid,  150;  how
regarded,  148.

BIBLE,  its  influence  on  civilisation,  122  ;
in  what  order  to  be  studied,  136.

BICCURIM,  whence  to  be  brought,  17  ;
views  of  Rabbi  Joses,  18;  Rab-
binical law  concerning,  18.

PIERS,  of  children,  169,  170.

BIMA,  261.

BIRTHDAY  texts,  for  children,  160.

BORDERS  of  garments,  219,  220.

BRIDES,  their  personal  consent,  143,
144;  dowries,  149,  150;  hair,
veils,  and  crowns,  154,  155;  of
high-priests,  156.

BRIDAL  lamps,  155.

BRIDECHAMBER,  children  of,  153.


334


Index.


BRIDEGROOM,  friends  of,  153.

BURIAL,  behaviour  of  mourners  after,
174;  dress,  168,  169;  meal  after,
174,  175  ;  places,  their  situation,
169;  preparation  for,  168;  pro-
cessions, and  their  order,  168,
170.


,  by  whom  built,  202  ;  drain-
age of,  92  ;  in  what  province,
71  ;  importance  attached  to,  71  ;
other  names  of,  72;  Rabbinical
laws  concerning,  72  ;  heathen
temple  in,  24.

CAPERNAUM,  synagogue  of,  255,  257.

CARAVAN  road,  the  great,  34.

CHABERIM,  regulations  imposed  on,
234,  235  j  their  novitiate,  236  ;
Ben-ha-Cheneseth,  235  ;  popu-
larity of,  243.

CHANUKAH,  108.

CHASHAIM,  246.

CHASIDIM,  or  pietist  Pharisees,  anec-
dotes of,  215,  216  ;  history  of,  231,
232  ;  principles  of,  233.

CHASTISEMENTS,  how  regarded,  163.

CHENESAH  or  Cheneseth,  250.

CHEPHAR  TABI,  78.

CHEPHAR  ZABA,  75.

CHETHUBAH,  or  marriage  contract,
149.

CHILDHOOD,  names  describing  its
different  stages,  103,  104.

CHILDLESSNESS,  how  regarded,  98.

CHILDREN,  education  of,  when  begun,
105,  106  ;  their  education  in  New
Testament  times,  118;  taught  by
father,  129  ;  carefulness  in  train-
ing, n  i,  112;  manner  of  teaching,
130  ;  popular  opinions  concerning
education  of,  135,  136  ;  Ecclesi-
asticus  on,  114  ;  influence  of
family  rites  and  feasts  on,  108,
109,  no;  majority  of,  120;  poor
and  orphaned,  treatment  of,  137,
138;  punishments  of,  99;  rela-
tionship to  parents,  99.

CHISSE,  churseja,  or  pergulah,  262.

CHURCH  in  the  house,  259.


CHRIST  in  the  Temple  among  the
doctors,  120,  121.

CHRISTIANITY,  difference  from  Juda-
ism, 4.

COINS,  superscription  on,  25.

COMMERCE,  201  ;  restricted  by  Mosaic
law,  202  ;  Jewish  feelings  concern-
ing, 205  ;  laws  regulating,  210.
See  also  TRADE.

CORN,  price  of,  211.

COSMETICS,  207.

COUNTRY  people,  how  regarded,  25.

COVENANT,  in  connection  with  salt  and
with  chastisements,  163,  164.

CREMATION,  how  regarded,  169.

DANIEL,  prophecies  of,  65.

DAY,  how  apportioned,  136.

DEAD,  conduct  before  burial  of,  1 73  ;
offices  for,  allowed  on  the  Sabbath,
175  ;  sea,  62

DEATH.  Angel  of,  persons  over  whom
he  had  no  power,  166 ;  anniversaries
of,  174;  after,  175;  sudden,  166 ;
manner  of,  166,  167  ;  how  regarded
in  the  New  Testament,  162  ;  pre-
mature and  without  leaving  sons,
165  ;  of  the  righteous,  166  ;  903
different  kinds  of,  166.

DEBTORS  and  CREDITORS,  laws  re-
specting, 211,  212  ;  parable  of
Christ  concerning,  57.

DECAPOLIS,  towns  ol,  23.

DISHONESTY,  how  regarded,  206,  207.

DIVORCE,  142  ;  how  obtained  and  for
what  reasons,  157,  158.

DRESS,  216,  219.

EDAH,  250,  251.

EGYPT,  number  of  Jews  in,  208.

ELEM,  104.

ELIJAH,  legend  concerning,  258.

ELOHIM,  282.

EMMAUS,  site  of,  and  for  what  noted,

79-

ENOCH,  book  of,  67.

ESSEN ES,  sect  of,  244  ;  resemblance  to
the  Zoroastrian  system,  245  ;  num-
ber, dress,  and  appearance,  245,


Index.


335


246  ;  religious  observances,  vows,
and  grades,  246,  247 ;  manner  of
spending  the  day,  247;  retreat  of,
61.

ESTHER,  141.

EULOGIES,  the  eighteen  said  before
"the  ark,"  272,  274.

EXPORTS,  Rabbinical  law  concerning,
74,  209.

EZRA,  revival  at  the  time  of,  231.

FAMILY  FEASTS,  97,  108

FAMILY  LIFE,  97,  123.

FEASTS,  of  Tabernacles,   Purim,  Cha-

nukah,  and  Passover,  108.
FRINGES  to  the  borders  of  garments,

219,  220.
FULLERS,  field  of;  then  proverbs,  196.

GABINIUS,  91.

GALILEE,  cities  and  inhabitants,  23,
24 ;  wealth,  30 ;  divisions,  sce-
nery, and  products  of,  33,  34,  35  ;
manufactures,  36,  37  ;  Rabbis  of,
and  their  sayings,  38 .

GALILEANS,  character  and  theological
views  of,  26,  39  ;  malpronunciation
of  Hebrew,  40.

GAMALIEL,  Rabbi,  views  on  decora-
tions, 90  ;  burial  of,  1 68.

GAMALIEL,  the  son  of  Jehudah,  190.

GAMALIEL  IL,  200.

GAZA,  79,  202.

GEHENNA,  creation  of,  176.

GEMARA,  the,  291,  292.

GENNESARET,  the  lake  of,  40.

GERBE,  synagogue  in  the  island  of,  258.

GEVER,GEVIRAH.  and  GEVERETH,  141.

GRAVES,  how  marked,  170.

GREEK  language,  126.

GUILDS,  Alexandrian  and  Jewish,  196.

HAGGADAH,  the  four  canons  and  thirty-
two  rules  for,  289 ;  in  the  Mishnah,
291.

HAGIOGRAPHA,  288.

HALACHAH,  288  ;  in  the  Mishnah, 291.

HALL  of  paved  stones,  265.

HEALTH,  Rabbinical  laws  and  regu-
lations for,  164.


HEATHENS,  how  regarded  by  the  Jews,
IS,  28.

HEAVENS,  when  created,  176;  number
of,  177.

HEBREW  language,  125.

HEBRON,  61.

HEROD  THE  GREAT.  51  ;  death  of,  51  ;
will  and  revenues,  10,  nj  coun-
sellors and  favourites,  24.

HEROD  ANTIPAS,  12.

HEZEKIAH,  his  regulations  for  learn-
ing* 75-

HIGHWAYS  in  Palestine  at  the  time  ol
Christ,  42;  their  size  and  repairs,

45»  46.

HILLEL,  Rabbi,  his  trade,  189 ;  on
business,  206.

HOSPITALITY,  rules  and  Rabbinical
sayings  concerning,  47-49.

HOUSES,  appearance  of,  90,  93 ;
strangers'  rooms,  ,94;  roofs,  the
road  of  the  roofs,  etc.,  95  ;  inner
courts  and  furniture,  96.

HUSBAND,  obligations  towards  a  wife,
158-

HYRCANUS,  John,  commission  ap-
pointed by  him,  233.

IMPORTS,  209.
INK,  132.
INNS,  49,  50.

JABNE,    anecdote   concerning    Rabbis

of,  195-
JAMNEH,  202.
JANNAI,  Rabbi,  anecdote  concerning,

32

JEHOSHAPHAT,  foreign  trade  of,  203.

JEHUDAH,  Rabbi,  on  Paschal  sacri-
fices, So;  on  the  stages  of  life,
105  ;  the  Holy,  death  of,  162  ;  on
trades,  182.

JERICHO,  soil  and  surroundings  of,  62.

JERUSALEM,  theatre  and  amphitheatre
of,  24 ;  religious  feelings  concern-
ing, 63,  64,  84 ;  Rabbinical  opi-
nions of  its  importance,  82 ;  syna-
gogues of,  83  ;  inhabitants  of,  84.

JOCHANAN  BEN  $ACCAI,   Rabbi,    say-


336


Index.


ing  of,  85  ;  death  of,  161 ;  anecdote
of,  195  ;  saying  on  conscientious-
ness, 195 ;  saying  on  wisdom,
205  ;  saying  on  prayer,  249.

JOPPA  or  JAFFA,  78,  202.

JONATHAN,  Rabbi,  saying  of,  i.

JORDAN,  land  east  of,  18.

JOSEPHUS  on  the  ten  tribes,  9;  story
of  the  Samaritans,  13  ;  on  the
religious  education  of  Jewish  chil-
dren, in;  on  writing,  131,  132;
on  commerce,  205  ;  on  phylacteries,
224.

JOSHUA,  the  son  of  Gamaliel,  celebrity
of,  134-

JUBILEES,  Book  of,  or  Lesser  Genesis,
285,  289.

JUDAEA,  pre-eminence  over  Galilee,  18;
learning  in,  31  ;  scenery  and  cele-
brated places,  59,  60 ;  wilderness
of,  6 1  ;  Jewish  sentiments  con-
cerning, 63;  Rabbinical  opinions
of,  70;  boundaries  and  divisions,
71.  73-

KABBALAH,  the,  292,  293.
KAHAL,  250,  251.
KEHALA  KADISHA,  245.
KHANS,  49,  50.

KNOWLEDGE  of  God,  how  regarded,
124,  125.

LABOUR,  love  of  the  Rabbis  for,  187  ;
manual  in  combination  with  study,
1 88,  1 89;  dignity  of,  acknowledged
by  the  Talmud  and  Rabbis,  192, 194;
change  of  feeling  concerning,  199.

LEMUEL,  114.

LIFE,  periods  and  length  of,  105,  165.

J  YDDA,  Lod,  or  Lud,  miracles  wrought
in,  43  ;  how  illustrative  of  the  New
Testament,  75,  76 ;  state  after  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  77 ;
scenery  of,  78.

MACCABEES,  rising  of,  116,  117,  232.
MAIMONIDES,  arrangement  of  countries,

18.
MANHIGEI,  282.


MARRIAGE,  Rabbinical  teaching  on,
and  four  classes  of,  144 ;  a  religious
obligation,  and  at  what  age,  147 ;
the  ceremony,  and  wedding  days,
151 ;  in  Cana,  and  surrounding
circumstances,  151,  152,  153;
festivities,  155  ;  bars  to,  156.

MASADA,  62.

MASSA,  royal  family  and  queen  of,  113,
114.

MATITHJA,  Rabbi,  saying  of,  200.

MATTHEW,  St.,  call  of,  42,  58.

MAZA  or  MOZE,  145.

MEAMAR,  279.

MECHILTHA,  285.

MEDICINAL  remedies,  165.

MEGILLATH  TAANITH,  or  roll  of  fasts,
175,  240.

MEIR,  Rabbi,  saying  of,  2 ;  on  trades,
182 ;  on  business,  205.

MEMUNIM,  282.

MESSIAH,  Jewish  expectancy  of,  65,
66,  67  ;  false,  66 ;  John  the  Bap-
tist and  the  Rabbis  on,  68,  69.

MESUSAH,  106,  107.

METURGEMAN,  277,  278.

MIDRASHIM,  285.

MIGDAL  EDER,  80.

MlGDAL  EZ,  26l,  262.

MISHNAH  on  the  ten  tribes,  9;  from
what  city  issued,  30 ;  character  of,
69;  how  explanatory  of  Luke  ii.
20,  etc.,  82 ;  regulations  as  to
languages  in  which  the  Bible  may
be  written,  119  ;  study  of  the,  129;
antiquity  and  contents,  291,  292  ;
on  the  guilt  of  adding  to  the  words
of  the  Scribes,  223.

MONEY,  changers  of,  210;  Rabbinical
advice  for  its  employment,  207.

MONOGAMY,  how  regarded,  143.

MOTHERS,  position  and  influence  of,
112,  114,  115  ;  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, 114,  115,  116;  the  four,  140.

MOUNTAIN,  the,  73.

NAIN,  burial  of  the  young  man  of,  170,

171.
NA/ARETH,  36.


Index.


337


NEHORAI,  Rabbi,  on  the  Thorah,  183.

NEKIJE  HADAATH,  245.

NER  OLAM,  or  lamp  in  the  synagogue,

262,  263.

NEVATH  BAYITH,  141.
NIVDALIM,  230,  232.

OFFERINGS,  whence  provided,  16.

OLD  TESTAMENT,  copies  and  rolls  of,
for  the  use  of  children,  117;  in
what  language  used  at  the  time
of  Christ,  118;  Greek  translation
of,  208.

OMER,  from  whence  brought,  17.

ONEN  and  AVEL,  Rabbinical  distinc-
tion ot,  173.

ONKELOS,  127.

ORATORIES,  261.

OSHPISAS,  50.

PALESTINE,  present  condition,  i ;  clim-
ate, scenery,  and  natural  produc-
tions, 2 ;  spiritual  blessings  of,  3,
4 ;  Jewish  love  for,  5,  6  ;  complete
loss  of  relics,  7  ;  extent  and  state
at  the  time  of  Christ,  8,  9,  10;
money  at  the  time  of  Christ,  II,
12;  divisions,  12;  inhabitants,  9;
boundaries  and  degrees  of  sanctity,
14,  15  ;  the  three  countries  desig-
nated by  this  term,  1 6  ;  parties  and
dialects,  20,  21  ;  Rabbinical  say-
ings concerning,  3,  4,  5.

PAPER,  132.

PARABLES,  Rabbinical,  resembling  that
of  the  wedding  guests,  179.

PARENTS,  influence  of,  on  the  phy-
sical condition  of  their  children,
163-

PAUL,  ST.,  on  signing  his  name  to
epistles,  131;  trade,  185,  1 86  Con-
spiracy of  the  Pharisees  against,  227,
229  ;  on  the  Christian  life,  231.

PENTATEUCH,  antiquity  of,  203,  204.

PENTECOST,  the  two  loaves  at,  17.

PERFUMERS,  217.

PHARISEES,  the  Chabura  of,  226,  227,
228,  234  ;  character  and  degrees  of,
215  ;  appearance  of,  219  ;  history,


225,  230 ;  grades,  and  vows,  233,
236;  prayers  of,  in  the  streets,  214;
regulations  made  for,  229  ;  resem-
blance of,  to  Ultramontanism,  230 ;
sectaries,  245,  246;  separation  of,
from  heathens,  26,  27  ;  system  of,
how  regarded  by  the  Rabbis  and
Sadducees,  237  ;  triumphs  of,  over
the  Sadducees,  239,  240.

PHILIP,  12;  inhabitants  and  towns  of
his  provinces,  21,  22.

PHILO,  opinions  of,  on  the  religious  edu-
cation of  children,  no;  Pharisees
not  mentioned  by,  1 14.

PHYLACTERIES,  or  tephillin,  where
worn,  220,  221  ;  importance  of,  in
the  eyes  of  the  Rabbis,  222  ;  su-
perstitious uses  of,  223,  224.

PHYSICIANS,  164,  165.

PLEDGES,  212.

POLICE,  secret,  50.

POLYGAMY,  142.

PRAYER,  in  the  house  and  synagogue,
249  ;  evening,  271  ;  how  regarded,
215;  after  the  Shema,  271  ;  Rab-
binical teaching  on  long,  272,  273  ;
attitude,  dress,  and  appearance
during,  276.

PRICES,  how  regulated,  206,  210.

PROFITS  in  trade,  210.

PSEUDO-EPIGRAPHIC  WRITINGS,  286,
287,  289,  290.

PUBLICANS,  character  of,  55,  56,  57,  58.
PURGATORY,  Rabbinical  views  on,  180.

RABBIS,  sayings  of,  5 ;  Akiba  and
Elieser  on  the  ten  tribes,  9 ;  Bechai,
3  ;  Akiba  on  meat  used  in  heathen
worship,  27  ;  prayer  of,  on  leaving
the  academy,  32 ;  character  of,
69  ;  opinions  of,  on  different  parts
of  Palestine,  70 ;  reverence  of,  for
age,  loo,  101 ;  how  regarded  by
the  Jews,  127,  128;  on  repentance
and  the  future  state,  180;  sayings
of,  on  trades,  189,  191  ;  teaching,
difference  from  Christianity,  192 ;
Seira,  anecdote  about  running  to
the  synagogue,  259.


338


Index.


RACHEL'S  PILLAR,  60.
RAMAH,  60.

ROYAL  REVENUES,  whence  derived,
52,  53-

SABBATH,  how  observed,  97.

SADDUCEES,  anecdote  of  a  high-priest,
240  ;  to  what  class  mostly  belong-
ing, 243  ;  doctrines  and  principles
of>  240,  241  ;  name  of  and  origin,
242,  243 ;  relation  of,  to  the  Phari-
sees, 239,  240.

SAFED,  or  ZEPHATH,  34.

SAMARIA,  how  regarded,  12,  13.

SANHEDRIM,  members  of,  ordination
and  qualifications,  281,  282 ;  of
towns,  91.

SCHOOLS,  elementary,  133,  134,  135  ;
where  kept,  and  by  whom,  137  ;
expenses  of,  and  hours  of  teach-
ing, 137-

SCHOOLMASTERS,  regulations  for,  135,
136.

SCIENCE,  study  of,  127.

SCRIBES,  131.

SCRIPTURES,  how  studied  by  children,
119.

SEBUA,  207.

SEKENIM,  282.

SEPULCHRES,  171,  172.

SHARON,  plain  of,  74.

SHELIACH  ZIBBUR,  283.

SHEMA,  the,  268,  269,  270;  where
said  in  the  synagogue,  272.

SHEPHERDS,  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  81.

SHEPHELAH,  61.

SHILOH,  59.

SHITRE  ERUSIN,  or  writings  of  be-
trothal, 148,  149.

SICKNESS,  how  regarded,  163.

SICK,  visitation  of,  167,  168.

SIN,  Rabbinical  teaching  on,  177,  178.

SIPHRA  and  SIPHRI,  books  of,  285.

SIRACH,  son  of,  13.

SOLOMON,  foreign  trade  and  income  of,
202,  203.

SON  OF  MAN,  67.

SORIA,  or  SYRIA,  what  countries  in-
cluded in,  17.


SOULS,  transmigration  of,  177.

STUDY,  subjects  for,  124,  125.

SYNAGOGUES,  alms  in,  283;  arch>
tecture,  situation,  and  appearance
of,  254,  255  ;  arrangements,  rulers,
and  minister  of,  258,  281,  282,
283;  Christ  in,  280;  congrega-
tions, 253  ;  consecration  and  sanc-
tity, 260 ;  devotions  in,  by  whom
conducted,  275  ;  lectionary  of,
277,  278,  279  ;  liturgy  and  wor-
ship, 267,  268  ;  names,  origin,  and
number  in  Jerusalem,  250,  251,
252,  253;  parts  and  furniture  of,
261,  262 ;  seats  in,  263,  264 ;
services  and  sermons,  277,  278,
279 ;  separation  of  the  sexes  in,
261 ;  Talmudical  teaching  on,  249  ;
in  the  Temple,  265  j  Temple
worship  superseded  by,  266 ;
object  of,  277  ;  mode  of  entering
and  leaving,  259. '

TALMUD,  7;    Jerusalem,    from    what

city  issued,  30.

See  also  GEMARA.
TARGUMIM,  spirit  of,  65  ;  of  Onkelos,

Jonathan,    and    pseudo-Jonathan,

284,  285.

TAX-COLLECTORS,  51,  52.
TAXES  and  TOLLS,  45,  52,  53,  54 ;  how

levied,  55,  56.

TEACHERS,  how  regarded,  137.
TEMPLE,  the,  scene  at  its  destruction,

66 ;  oil  for,  whence  brought,  71 ;

opening  of  doors,    85  ;    drainage,

92  ;  stones  for  rebuilding,  197.
TEMPLE  of  Onias  at  Leontopolis,  208  ;

workmen  for,  195.
TEPHILLAH,  the,  272.
THERUMOTH,  17.
THEUDAS,  66.
THIRTEEN    things    belonging    to    the

Almighty,  3.
THORAH,    Rabbinical  opinions   on  its

study,    126,   127;  influence  of,  on

education,    128;  qualifications  for

acquiring,  206.
TIBERIAS,  colleges  of,  30.


Index.


339


TIMOTHY,  116.

TITHES  and  THERUMAH,  regulations
for  payment  of,  234,  235.

TOBLE  SHACHRITH,  245.

TOWNS,  appearance,  streets,  guilds,
and  houses,  88,  89,  90;  autho-
rities and  regulations,  91,  92,  93 ;
circumference  and  names,  87.

TRADE,  of  the  Rabbis,  189,  190 ;  how
regarded  by  the  Mishnah,  Tal-
mud, and  Rabbis,  190,  191  ;  what
forbidden  by  the  Mishnah,  ^4;
unions,  198.

TRADITIONALISM  destructive  of  re-
verence, 101,  102.

TYRE  and  Si  DON,  coasts  of,  19.

TYROPOEON  VALLEY,  196.

UPPER  ROOMS,  95.

USURY,  how  regarded  by  the  Rabbis,
205  ;  laws  respecting,  21 1.

VAAD,  250.

VATHIKIN,  245.

VEHICLES  for  travelling,  46.

VEIL,  of  the   Most  Holy   Place,   197  ;

of  synagogues,  262.
VILLAGES,     how    distinguished     from

towns,  87.
Vows,  how  made,  and  absolved  from,

229.


WEAVERS,  how  regarded,  194.

WEIGHTS  and  measures,  inspectors  of,
206  ;  laws  for,  210.

WINE  used  in  the  Temple,  whence
brought,  70,  71.

Wii NESS-BEARING,  persons  unfit  for,
205.

WOMAN,  creation  of,  Rabbinical  ideas
connected  with,  140,  146 ;  edu-
cation of,  132,  133  ;  equality  with
man,  and  ministry  of,  141,  142  ;
Holy  women,  139,  ^40,  141  ;  how
protected  by  the  law,  143  ;  social
position  of,  98,  139 ;  qualities
most  desirable  in,  146,  147  ;  pro-
perty of,  148  ;  women  of  the  New
Testament,  159.

WORK,  injunctions  concerning,  by  St.
Paul,  1 86,  187.

WORKMEN,  Palestinian,  196;  troubles
of  employers  with,  198.

WRITING,  130;  forgery  of,  and  use
of  initial  letters,  131.

YOUNG  MEN,  Rabbinical  opinions  of
their  learning,  100.

ZENIUM,  245.
ZIBBUR,  250.
ZION,  elegies  of  the  synagogues  for,  6.


INDEX    TO    SCRIPTURE    REFERENCES,


GENESIS.
Page

NUMBERS.
Paee

DEUTERONOMY.
Page

2  KINGS.
Page

lii.  21  48,  167

V;    23     .     I3I

58..    131,  163

iv.  23  252

xv    18                          8

24  26          .    268

xviii.  i  48,  167
„     12  139

xiv.  27     253

xxxi.  6   178
„..  13  i"

xv.  29  33
xx:.i   167

„     i9  «i
*x.  3  141

xv.  31  178
„    37  219

xxxii.  39    178

„     14   "3

»...39--  220

„      6  48,167

iv.  38-43    113

JOSHUA.

,      27    50

xxiv.  16  259

Xllll.  21    50

EXODUS.

XXVlll.   2  3

x.  13   131
xvn.  ii,  16    ....     23
xviii.  9   131

2  CHRONICLES.

v|;4    178

iv.  4    178
,,   9,  10  ...  .in,  129

xx.  7  33
xxu.  24,  25    ....     18

xx.  36,  37  203

M    26   Ill

VI.  4-9.  .107,  117,  221,

EZRA.

„     8,14  in

„     268,   270

JUDGES.
M?    23

iv.  13,  20  45,  52

VI.  21    230

„       II-IO  221
XV.  1  178

,;    9  106,    !30

viii.  5,  7  164

xni.  23    140

i  SAMUEL.

xx.  24  3,  6

xi.  13-21    ••107,  117,

,,        ....221     268     270

21  178

ESTHER

„       12  288

xxxi.  10,  ii  ....     23

M     4  167

JOB.

xxxn.  2,  3  140

vni.  3-14    8

LEVITICUS.
ii   13                        163

»    .18    I3I
XV111.   21,   12    ....    100

i  KINGS.

12    ••             ..     2IQ

,,     10,  ii  174

,,     i,  3  T30

,?  28,  29  202

xxxvii.  28  231

j8  45

<;<;..                  i

XXVll.   21       .              .       31

xxii.  48  ..         ..  203

Ixvi.  20  ..         ..   161

Index  to  Scripture  References.


341


PSALMS.
1

'age
153
141
178

ISAIAH.

Page

MlCAH.

Page

ST     MATTHEW.
Page
xxii.  1-14  179
„    20  25
„    30  178

196
104
33
295
104
"3
"3
295

79
140

3

1

Ixxii   16

vi.  4
HAGGAI.
ii.  8

Ixxiv   8

Ixxviii.  5,  6    ....

Ixxxii.  i
„      6

in

33
249
282

63

,,  2,  6  103,
xi.  8

»?..  45   266

»     4     235

ZECHARIAH.

„       5  2l6,  220
..       6       263

XXIV.   15,   20     ....        23

..     17  94
xxv.  i  155

XC1V.   12

cix:.3i     •

164
48

xxym.  9

xi.  i

CX1X

cxxi.  8

6
114
107

xlviii.  22
xlix.  16

74
179

221

250
I78
104

MALACHI.

ST.  MATTHEV
i.  18,  19

143

r,

I48
79
ii
Si
61
5,  23
267

xxvi   7    217
„     12  168
,,..73  40
xxvn.  7,  52,  53  ..   169
„      41-43   ....     75
„      46     n8
„      51     85
„      66     171

ST.  MARK.
i.  21    267

cxxxii.  13-18     ..
cxxxvii.  5,  6  ....

PROVERBS.
"i-  3

64
63

254

221
l63
221
I64
221
200
258

168
168

200

J45
1  68

Hi  8

liii.  2

„       21

Ixi.  10
Ixii.  8

179
179
155
222
I79
249

250
105

,,     22

„   16
„   17,  18
iv.  13,  IS   i
„  23

„   23
vii.  3
viii.  21

...     34
xiv.  32

JEREMIAH.

xii-4
xv.  8
xvii.  8

I  3  ::::::::::

..  32
vi.  5

i57

254

191

280

«•  4  95
v.i  23

„     22,  23  282
„     25  164,   165

,,.  35,  36,  38  282

XV1H.  21

104
98
60
I04
60

...    22

xxii.  10
xxxi.  15

Vlt  z'  2^

ix.  i

169
255
37
153
282

vii.  7,  8  223

„     2-9

„   10-31  ....

ECCLESIASTES

iv.  13
vii.  26    38,
ix-9

"3
114
114

104
145
190

xli.  17  50

LAMENTATIONS.
iv.  4    104

,,  18

„     13  223
„    24  19

x.  5

»3
15

'.'..  31  22

viii.  22    37

EZEKIEL.

ix.  6

293
104
279
155
153

6
283

259

4
259

154

,,27

XI.  21
...28-30

94
37
270
119

ix.  23  168

»    38,  39  127
40  272

SONG  OF  SOLOMC

)N.

74
155
34

XVI.  2

xxvin.  13
xxxvii.  12-14    •  •

DANIEL.

x»i.  54
xiv.  3
,,     36

255

220

,,    IS     94
xv.  40  37

vii.  5

„    6  ..

xvi.  I  37

.....  9
„     6

ISAIAH.

224

221

4

254
132

103

xii.  3

HOSEA.

„    16

xviii.  17

21
12
15

ST.  LUKE.

"'I  ::::::::::

xix.  3,  10
„    4

»57
119

XI.  10

JOEL.
ii.  16

,,68-70    64

ii.  2

,,.i7,  29
xxi.  13,  1  6,  42

44
nq

„     12,    l6  lit)

..   17,  r8.  ,  Si

..  6...

342


Index  to  Scripture  References.


ST.  LUKE.
Page
ft  20     8l

ST.  JOHN.
Page

ACTS.
Page

i  THESSALONIANS.
Page
ii   g     jgg

„  46  "9,265

iii.  j      ,  ..  21

,,  9'10  *3

xviii.  2,  3  89

o      .                 ,.     !8c

iv.  ii,  12   186
13-18    .         .   187

99    8,  17  282

„  16-21     275

,,  25-28  257

,,    34,  35   185

„  17  250,  278

xxi.  5  47

v.iy    73

,;.  59   257,  267

,,       40    21,    119

»>  J9    95
,,  29    42
vi.  6    267

,.,..52.  31
via.  48    13

xxiii.  8,  9  ..       .  228

,,       12,  21             .    227

„     16  227

,,.'2     146

111.  i-io  282
v.  10   138

vn.  3   92

„     31    ...       43,  74

,,.  «-»5   l69
via.  2  37

„  38,  39    171
,,  44  169

ROMANS.

i.  5  "5

„    26    23
,,    4«»  49  282
.„    44  220

,,47  77
„  48  69
,,.54,55    77
*»:..«  37

v"i.  33    98
ix.  3    174

??.  I0      X^

iv.  13  132

PHILEMON.

,,  53  44
x.  5-10   49

XVlll.   20  267

,,      28  27

xvi.   35     259

ii.    259

,,3o    44
„  34    164
„  35    12

„    5,  7  169
xxi.  i    37

vii  145

iii.  i    283

XL  43  127
xn.  3  94
V..58  57

14    282

,,    2  37

,,      22  4I

ACTS.
j:8  73

»>.  39  X44

ix.  18  185
x.  25,  27,  28  ....     27

»..  7  98
x"i.  2  48
„   7  282

JAMES.

xvi  17    ........  118
„     25,  26  176
xvii.  2  174

„    31    94

xix.  i  62
,,    i,  28   44

u.  5  65
,,46    259
v.  6,  10     168
„  36,  37  40,  66
,,  42    '••   259
vi.  9  83,  252

viii.  2  168
..„    28     46

2  CORINTHIANS.
vi.  14  144,  231

XL  2      153

GALATIANS.

u.  2,  3    264
v.  14    167
i  PETER.

iii.  5    139
,,   6   141

V.  2  282

2  JOHN.

,,    4  33
„    12-15,  27    ..     10

,,..47  272
xxiv.  13  78

ST.  JOHN.

,,  36  78

„  37,  39    168
,,  32-43  44

,,28    27
,,.39   73

„    20,  21      19

i.  17,  18  ..*.  42

„    12      28

EPHESIANS.
iv.  28  193
v.  28    145
vi.  4    99,  "2

i  114

12  132

13  "5

3  JOHN.
13  ^a

JUDE.

„  35,  42  151

».,.  26  *9

xn.  13,  14  96

PHILIPPIANS.
iv.  3    159

REVELATION.

»>.  *9  71

H  4°    31
u.  I-H    37

xiv.  6  115

COLOSSIANS.

Hi-  4    23i

..     13-21     ..        ..    231

xiv.  4  33*

London:     Pardon  and  Sons,  Printers,  Paternoster  Row.


PUBLICATIONS      OF

J^Hgtxttts     Urittji


Bv  THE  AUTHOR  OF  "  SKETCHES  OF  JEWISH  SOCIAL  LIFE."

The     Temple:    its    Ministry    and    Services    as    they    were    at   the    Time    of
Jesus  Christ.     Imperial  i6mo.     55.  cloth  boards.

Elisha  the  Prophet:    the  Lessons    of  his  History  and    Times.      Crown   8vo.
25.  6d.  cloth  boards.

THE  BIBLE  HISTORY—

The      World     before     the     Flood,     and     the     History     of     the     Patriarchs.
With  Map.     Crown  8vo.     23.  6d.  cloth  boards,

The     Exodus     and     the      Wanderings     in     the     Wilderness.       Crown     8vo.
2S.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Israel    in    Canaan,     under   Joshua    and   the    Judges.     With   Coloured    Map.
Crown  8vo.     23.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Israel  under  Samuel,    Saul,   and  David,    to  the   Birth  of  Solomon.      Crown
8vo.     25.  6d.  cloth  boards.

History  of  Jttdah   and  Israel,  from    the    Birth  of   Solomon   to  the   Reign  of
Ahab.    Crown  8vo,     as.  6d.  cloth  boards.

History  of  Israel  and  Judah,  from    the    Sacrifice    on    Carmel  to  the  Death
of  Jehu.     Crown  8vo.     25.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Israel  and  fudah,from  the  Decline  of  the  Two  Kingdoms  to  the  Assyrian  and
Babylonian  Captivity.    With  Indexes  to  the  whole  Series.     33.  cloth  boards.
Or,  complete  in  4  vols.   i6s.  the  set.


A  New  Companion  to  the  Bible.  An
Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Scriptures,
for  Bible  Classes,  Sunday  Schools,  and
Families.  With  Maps.  Crown  8vo.  2s.  6dv
cloth  boards.

Angus.  —  The  Bible  Handbook.  An  In-
troduction to  the  Study  of  the  Sacred  Scrip-
tures. By  JOSEPH  ANGUS,  D.D.,  Member
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.  Map.  Crown
8vo.  55.  boards  ;  73.  half-bound.

Barrows. — The  Manners  and  Customs
of  the  Jews.  By  the  Rev.  E.  P.  BARROWS,
D.D.,  Author  of''  A  New  Introduction  to  the
Bible,"  etc.  Carefully  Revised,  and  with
many  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  23.  6d.
cloth  boards.

Bickersteth.—The  Spirit  of  Life  ;  or,
Scripture  Testimony  to  the  Divine  Person
and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  By  BISHOP
BICKERSTETH.  8vo.  45.  cloth  boards.


Bickersteth. — The  Rock  of  Ages  ;  or,
Scripture  Testimony  to  the  One  Eternal
Godhead  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  By  BISHOP  BICKER-
STETH. 8vo.  2S.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Bourdillon.  —  The  Parables  of  our  Lord
Explained  and  Applied.  By  the  Rev.  F.
BOURDILLON,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  35.  6d.
cloth  boards.

Bush.— The  Pentateuch,  Popular  In-
troduction to.  By  the  Rev.  R.  WHELER
BUSH,  M.A.,  Rector  of  St.  Alphage,  London
Wall.  Crown  8vo.  25.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Biish.  — Joshua, Judges,  and  Ruth,  Popu-
lar Introduction  to.  By  the  Rev.  R.  WHELER
BUSH,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  2s.  cloth  boards.

Cox.  —  The  Book  of  Ruth:  a  Popular
Expostion.  By  the  Rev.  SAMUEL  Cox,
Author  of  "  Rabbi  Agur's  School,"  etc.  23
cloth  boards.


PUBLICATIONS    OF   THE   RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY.


Cox. — Rabbi  Agrir'*  School,  and  its
Four  Teachers.  By  the  Rev.  S.  Cox,
Author  of  "  The  Book  of  Ruth,"  etc.  With
Illustrations.  Royal  i6mo.  is.  cloth  boards.

Crtiden. — A  Complete  Concordance  of
the  Scriptures,  on  the  Basis  of  Cruden.
With  an  Introduction  by  the  Rev.  D.  KING,
LL.D.  35.  6d.  boards  ;  6s.  6d.  half-bound  ;
IDS.  6d.  morocco.

Culross.—The  Home  at  Bethany:  its
Joys,  its  Sorrows,  and  its  Divine  Guest
By  the  Rev.  J.  CULROSS,  D.D.  23.  6d.
cloth  boards.

Eadie. — A  Biblical  Cyclopedia  ;  or,  A
Dictionary  of  Eastern  Antiquities,  Geo-
graphy, Natural  History,  Biography,  Theo-
logy, and  Biblical  Literature.  Edited  by  J.
EADIE,  I.L.D.  8vo.  75.  6d.  boards  ;  IDS.  6d.
half-bound  :  ias.  6d.  calf;  135.  6d.  morocco.

Edersheim. —  The  Laws  and  Polity  of
the  Jews.  By  ELISE  W.  EDERSHEIM.  Cr.
8vo.  2S.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Glover. — Lecttires  on  the  Lord's  Prayer.
By  the  Rev.  RICHARD  GLOVER,  of  Bristol.
Crown  8vo.  is.  6d.  cloth.

Glover. — The  Beatittides.  By  the  Rev.
R.  GLOVER.  i6mo.  is.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Green. — A  Handbook  to  the  Grammar
of  the  Greek  Testament.  Together  with
Complete  Vocabulary  and  an  Examination  of
the  chief  New  Testament  Synonyms.  Illus-
trated by  numerous  Examples  and  Com-
ments. By  the  Rev.  S.  G.  GREEN,  D.D.
Post  8vo.  75.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Howson. — Meditations  on  the  Miracles
of  Christ.  By  the  late  J.  S.  HOWSON,  D.D.,
Dean  of  Chester.  First  and  Second  Series.
Crown  8vo.  Each  35.  cloth  boards.

Howson, — Hora  Petrince ;  or,  Studies
in  the  life  of  St.  Peter.  By  the  late  J.  S.
HOWSON,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Chester,  Author
of  "Scenes  in  the  Life  of  St.  Paul,"  etc.
Crown  8vo.  35.  cloth.

Landels.—The  Great  Cloud  of  Wit-
nesses: Abel  to  Moses.  By  W,  LANDELS,
D.D.  Crown  8vo.  45.  cloth  boards.

Landels. — The  Great  Cloud  of  Wit-
nesses :  Joshua  to  David.  By  W.  LANDELS,
D.D.  Crown  8vo.  45.  cloth  boards.


Lewis.  — The  Life  of  Lives  ;  or,  The
Story  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  in  its  Earliest
Form.  By  the  Rev.  W.  S.  LEWIS,  M.A.,
Author  of  "The  Great  Problem,"  etc.
Crown  8vo.  25.  6d.  cloth.

Manning.  — "  Those  Holy  Fields."
Palestine  Illustrated  by  Pen  and  Pencil.  By
the  Rev.  SAMUEL  MANNING,  LL.D.  Uniform
with  "  Swiss  Pictures,"  "  Italian  Pictures,"
etc.  Profusely  illustrated.  Imperial  8vo.
8s.  cloth,  gilt  edges.

Paley. — A  View  of  the  Evidences  oj
Christianity.  By  WILLIAM  PALEY,  D.D.
With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Supplement
by  the  Rev.  T.  R.  BIRKS,  M.A.  Crown  8vo,

35.  cloth  boards.

Paley. — Horce  Paulince  ;  or,  The  Truth
of  the  Scripture  History  of  St.  Paul  Evinced,
with  Notes,  and  a  Supplementary  Treatise,
entitled  "  Horae  Apostolicae,"  by  the  Rev.
T.  R.  BIRKS,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  35.  cloth
boards.

Sayce. — Ezra,  Nehemiaht  and  Esther ;
A  n  Introduction  to  the  Books  of.  By  A .  H
SAYCE,  LL.D.,  Author  of  "  Fresh  Light
from  the  Ancient  Monuments."  Crown  8vo.
2s.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Stanford. — From  Calvary  to  Olivet.
A  Course  of  Homilies.  By  CHARLES  STAN-
FORD, D.D.,  Author  of  "  Symbols  of  Christ,"
"Voices  from  Calvary,"  "The  Alternatives
of  Faith  and  Unbelief,"  etc.  Crown  8vo.

36.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Stanford.  —  The  Alternatives  of  Faith
and  Unbelief.  By  the  Rev.  C.  STANFORD,
D.D.  i6mo.  is.  6d.  cloth  boards.

Stock. — Lesson  Studies  in  the  Book  oj
Genesis.  By  EUGENE  STOCK,  Author  of
"  Lessons  on  the  Life  of  our  Lord,"  etc.-
Crown  8vo.  as.  cloth  boards.

Symington.  — Joseph,  The  Story  of.
Read  in  the  Light  of  the  Son  of  Man.  A
Popular  Exposition.  By  the  Rev.  A.  M.
SYMINGTON,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.  2s.6d.  cloth
boards.

Symington —  Vox  Clamantis :  The  Life
and  Ministry  of  John  the  Baptist.  By  the
Rev.  ALEX.  MACLEOD  SYMINGTON,  D.D.
Crown  8vo.  25.  6d.  cloth  boards.


LONDON:      THE     RELIGIOUS     TRACT     SOCIETY,

56,    PATERNOSTER    Row;     65,    ST.    PAULS    CHURCHYARD;

AND    164,    PICCADILLY.


THIS  BOOK    S  DUE  ON


-"'"•SSSa-


•*  •  — ~  DATE


'.NTS

ETURN
MALTY
>URTH
DAY


U


*I-        .  /SLO


U.C.  BERKELEY  LIBRARIES


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY


